Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
Wie UGANDA CHRISTIAN
ai; %, UNIVERSITY
— A Centre of Excellence in the Heart of Africa
RESEARCH POLICY

Schedule
ha
Vice Chancellor’s Signature
eS od
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
Preamble:-

Uganda Christian University (UCU) is a private, not-for-profit University, established by the
Anglican Church of Uganda in 1997. In 2004, the University was chartered as the first private
University in the country. UCU operates 3 campuses (Mukono, Arua and Kampala) and 2
constituent colleges in Mbale and Kabale. The Christian Identity of Uganda Christian
University is espoused in the Instruments of Identity, and the House of Bishops is corporately
and exclusively custodian of the Instruments of Identity.

Staff and Students are required to respect the Instruments of Identity and to observe the laid
down rules and the Code of Conduct BOTH at the University and while away on official or
authorized events.

MOTTO: “Alpha and Omega: God the Beginning and the End”

VISION: “A Centre of Excellence in the Heart of Africa”

MISSION: “To Equip students for productive, holistic lives of Christian faith and service”
CORE VALUES: Christ-Centredness, Diligence, Integrity, Servanthood, Stewardship

THEME: “A Complete Education for A Complete Person”

UCU’s Niche: Professionalism and Character

In its Strategic Plan (2012-2018), UCU aims at achieving the following objectives:

Identity: UCU’s identity as an authentic Christian institution.

Governance and leadership: Accountable leadership.

Teaching and learning: A high quality education with a diverse yet integrated curriculum.
Targeted research: Rigorous, relevant, focused and innovative research.

Service to the community: Assisting communities to achieve holistic development.

Student recruitment and development: A diverse array of students.

Staffing: Attracts, recruits, and retains a staff noted for excellence in teaching, research,
and praxis.

Great campuses: The physical infrastructure that meets the education, ICT, and
administrative needs and standards while preserving campus history and beauty.

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 2 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
UCU’s Niche
Professionalism and Character

The Vision of Uganda Christian University (UCU) states as follows: “A Centre of Excellence

in the Heart of Africa”. Her Mission is: “To Equip Students for Productive, Holistic Lives

of Christian Faith and Service”. And UCU’s Theme is: “A Compete Education for A

Complete Person”. These core statements, and others that UCU has, espouse a sense of

purpose and a quest for the highest goal attainable, especially among our students.

For this reason, it is proposed that UCU’s Niche as a University shall be, “Professionalism &

Character”. The following is the rationale to this Niche.

Professionalism:

That UCU can draw from her Christian ethos to inculcate exemplary professionalism among

her products. The graduate from UCU, as well as UCU’s Services, shall be expected to exhibit

distinguished methods of work, standing, and practices that are ahead and above the

ordinary, putting to best use the training received, as well as always aiming at excellence in

everything. A professional is well equipped for his/her vocation, puts service to the customer

first, and aims to work beyond the call of duty. The Professional presents oneself with

dignity and appropriate decorum. Professionalism will mean we walk and work the extra

mile.

Professionalism in Uganda declined over the years of political misrule and has degenerated

further amidst the current ambivalence about what it really is. Self-interest, partisanship

and social discrimination replaced equity. Unfortunately, it is easier to pull down the values
_ and virtues of society, quite another to rebuild it. The rebuilding itself may take a different

route contemporaneous with the new context, presenting an opportunity for a UCU

graduate. .

Character:

Character is a function of virtue, integrity, mores, moral and ethical quality in an individual.

It is assumed that people learn character, especially from Culture and from Religion. UCU is

able within the scope of her resources to give both. The University purposes to create a

community bound together by our common Core Values: Christ-Centredness, Diligence,

Integrity, | Servanthood and Stewardship, which are, in themselves, demonstrate

character; each of them is a character quality.

UCU’s graduates have distinguished themselves for their virtue and dependability at work,

and for other character qualities of positive influence. This is without a doubt the legacy of

UCU’s Christian Identity. The Gospel of Jesus Christ undergirds the influence and formation

of character in UCU students. It has been said, “People are hired for their skills; they are

fired for their character.” The former wins one a job, the latter makes one indispensable in

the job.

There is nothing more exciting employability and vocationalisation than a worker who

exhibits Professionalism with Character.

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 3 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
PREFACE

This document is a result of a series of consultations that Uganda Christian University
School of Research and Postgraduate Studies made within and outside the University.
Certain areas of the Research Policy outlined herein ought to be read as evolving in
relation to policy formulation in other committees of the University.

The University Senate shall provide general oversight of the implementation of this
policy. It is envisioned that Research, Innovations, Publications and Consultancy will
develop to a Division under the Dean, School of Research and Postgraduate Studies.
The Policy document has greatly benefited from the Daystar University Research
Policy, Makerere University Draft Policy Document (2007), Kenyatta University
Research Policy and Joint Clinical Research Centre Research Policy.

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 4 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PreaMbles oe eecceccescessesseceseeseeseeeceecsecsecseseseeseaeeecaecsecaeseceaeeaceacessaessaceeseaseaeeaesseseesaesaesaseasesesaseasseeseeesees 2
ICUS NICTG...nneneanncne-ensnensnnistoinsnncennarennsanasnennennaeadtiosniitinnthiaitistuhthianbissddhidantasnnenncarensanananancaticansiiisvasinis tisiebiod
PREFACE ou e.ceeececececescseecesesesesesessesesesesesscscseesssssesaesesesescacseecseecscaeeecacseecaeseessaceeeacaeesessseeeesescsseceeeesaceeeeeseeeeae 4
ACFONYMS ANA ADDreViatiONS......... cc ecccsccsseesecssesscesecseessesseeseceaceseceseeaceseeesecessesessseesssecsesssessesesseeseess O
1.0 INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND js cssssincnscecssncarsurcsxassean scanvannanenaiaraiaianadiakaiaeacesmsamsanansscons @
1.1 Uganda Christian University Vision .........cccccceeccesceseceseececeeeeseeeecaeeesecssesseceesesessesseessseeeseesseeesees D
1.2 Uganda Christian University Mission ...........:cccccceceseeseesseseeseeseeseeeeeeeceseeseeseecsecsecsssessssreaeessesseee D
1.4 Uganda Christian University Research Mandate ............cccscsscssseesscesccsscesscssesscescessesscsseesseeneees O
1.5 The need for a university research POLiCy. .......ccecccceccesecescesecsseesseesscesecsscesecssesessesstesseseeeseees D
1.6 Research and Teaching... cc cececceessessseeseeseeeceeceesseesecaesaeeeesaessesesereeseessesseseeesseasseseeseseeeeeeeetes LO
2.0: RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION POLICY sosiccccccoccuassannmmonemannunmanmnmeanmmennemameann LL.
2.1 Gemeral Principles ...... ec eccccccceceseeseeseeseeseeceecseeseeseeseeaeeeeceeeeeeeseaeeeesecessecseeseseeessesseaseeeeeens LL
2.2 Provision and dissemination of knowledge through mentoring and apprenticeship........11
2.3 Guarantee quality through using conventional channels of publication. ......... eee LD
2.4 Generate knowledge to put across perspectives that influence national and regional
POLICY ANA PractiCe..... ee ececeeseseeeeseeseeseeeeeseecsecsecseeeeescessacceaecesseeceseaeeaesaessessesareeceeseesaseateateaseatens LZ
2.5, Publication of Supervised) WONK, snc cesssssrsseresesecousssceremerrneeammene aetna Le.
2.6 Jointly generated work shall be proportionately OWNEd QQ... eeeeceeeeeetseteeseeeetecteeateneeneeee LZ
3.0 RESEARCH AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT ............:cccececeeseseeseeeeseeseeeeseeseseeseseeeesseeatenteeeeeeres L3
3.1 Emphasis on publication and dissemination of kKnoWledge 0.0... eeeecceecseeeceseeteeeeeeeeteees 13
3.2 Create a research supportive environment in the University... cceeeeteetteeteeereeee 13
3 AWEGS FOr PUI ISH ING ssc ascisinsc crcensnanancuaann sacoannnacxasaaiareen sa saunmacanaisieadiadtaliensen one nendnemansuaamammuaais LS
3.4 Academic staff account for their contribution to knowledge development every three
YOCOM. oe eeeccccseeeeseseseseesesescseseeeseessesensuesscseserscecsesaescsesesesecacseessceacscseecacseeeaceeeseaeesesesseeetsestseteetetateteetereee L4
3.9 R@S@arch AQGnd anc. ansaancincmanaaimnananamuannauin amma amanda ans LA
ee Piles eeereener eemeresnreeemeroneonmernemes
4.0 CO-ORDINATION OF RESEARCH... ceeeeecceceseeeecseseeeeeseecseeeeeeecaeeecaeeeeecaeeeeseieeeeseesseaeeeeseetateeeeteeeteee 14
4.1 School of Research and Postgraduate Studies Activities .......... ccc ccecceeeeeseeseeesesteeeeeeees 15
4.2 Office of the Dean, School of Research and Postgraduate Studies 0.0.0... cceeeeeeteeteeeeee 16
4.3 Research COMMIttee «2.0... cece eeseseceeeeesesneneseeneseensaeeeensassesneasseseeneassessssssssssetesseesasseeeesesees LB
4.4 Administration of Research Grant Scccesscssccssseunescessssarusscasmuasnmncacnanscemnansmnssnmnsuneewcainanne 1
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 5 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
4.5 Declaration by the Researche r.........cccccccessccssceeseeesseeeseessecessecesecsseeesssceseccsssesssessesessecstseessessses 22
5.0 UGANDA CHRISTIAN UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FUND (UCURF)........ccceecceeseeeeseeeeeeseeeeseeetseeeeneees 22
5.1 Broad Principles of the Uganda Christian University Research Fund ........0.cceeceseeeeeeteeree 22
5.2 Sources, Allocation and Distribution of Research Funds from UCURFP.............00ccceeeeeees 23
5.3 Apportionment of Annual Research Grant (ARG)... ceccceeceeeeeeneeeeeeeteeessseseeeteeeteeaeeeees 23
5.4 Training of Researchers to be able to participate in competitive research................4.23
5.5 Funding Competitive Research and/or Project Proposals...............cssssssossseresesesessceensaessonne 24
6.0 INTERNALLY FUNDED RESEARCH ........eccccsceeeeseeseeeeseseeseeseseesesecsesecseeeaeeceesaeeesseeeeesaeersseeeeeeseeneeas 29
6.1 General framework guiding the preparations and approval of research procedures. ....25
6.2 Sharing of research rESOUFCES. .......cceecesceceseceseeeseeseeeeeseeseceseeseceseeseceaeeeceaerseeeseeeesaeetesseetestees 20
6.3 Staff Remuneration aNd HONOrAariUM 2.00... ee eee eee eeeeeeeseeeesecseeeeeaeeaeeaeeaceaesaeesceasssesasessereeeentens 27
6.4 Internal Procedures for Approval, Control and Monitoring of research Projects. ...........27
6.5 Research Contract ANd FUNCING. .......ceecececcceseeseesceeseeseceseeseceeeeseeeeeeaeseaeeaeeeeseseeeseeatenseeeesseenees 29
6.6 Interim Progress REPOFts.........ccececcecssesseeseseesseseeseesceseeseeecececseceeeseeseeseceesetaeeaeeaeeseeseeseeseeseerens 29
6.7 Fitval RESGarOh REPOST. ........-.ccnncenxonrdnnntiAsibiiesiiite ss sKsis¥at6d3i6tihstais tbe snnedis SiikadshaNPESATNSAhA TANSN TOK Ss sbsdasesi DD
SE eee I. ces eeeeeneeenonerserer neerroerenemanl
7.0 AWARDS AND RECOGNITION ...0.....cecceceseeceseseeseseeseneescesseescseeecaeeseeecseeeeaeeessesaeeeeesreeseesetaserseseetaeeres SO
7:1 Publications, IAVeNtiONS aNd! INNOVAUIONS cscs were nsevnsesaemmesrncreanmesowa sme
7.2 Uganda Christian University Annual Research Conference ..........:cceceseeeeeeeeeeseesetseteeseeteeee 30
8.0 RESEARCH FINDINGS AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS. .......csccssssesssseessseessesessesssesssseees 32
8.1 Records Of RESGaCH FIOGINGS séccncmecvesssarcsnmemanneraves eoneennmemenmnemeeemnmRoe
8.2 Retention Of DOCUMENES 0.0... eee cess eseneeseeseseescseescsscscsecscsececsecscsessesecaeseeesesesessesseseetstseseeaeees BS
8.3 Access and Use of Research Findings ..0.......cccceceesesccesceeeseceseeseeesecaeecaeeeeeeseeaeeeaeeeeeeaseeseneeteees OS
8.4 Intellectual Property: Ri SNS ecsrseceecneosseesanmsneuseuecrvesrarereramamcaxeumasmacs cme eesermaremennS Oo
9.0 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 00... .eccecceccceeeseeeeneeeeseseeececsessesescseneecacsesesecaceeesaeeeeeessetaeessatieessseatateeseees BS
10.0 UNIVERSITY / PRIVATE SECTOR FUNDING RESEARCH ...0.......cecceeseeseereeeeseeceseeeeeeesesteeeseeeeeeeeeee 34
10.1 Acceptance of a Research Project warns ssmesnmanceuemn em
10.2 Limits on the Sponsors’ POWE? ..........ccccsescceseseseeseeeeeeeeseeseeeeecseceseeaeceaeeseeeaeeseetecseeesetatetsesteetees O4
10.3 PUDLICATIONS 2.0. ee ee eeceeeseeeeneesecseeacsecaecaseaecsecaeeaecsceacasecesecsacaesaecaeseaseetaetaetsetaseseessesseseseees O4
10.4 Graduate Student Involvement in Private Sector RESe@arch.....c..ccscsssesssneeasssrrosesseeseneen SD
10.5 Conflict of a ET
10.6 Ownership Of INVENUIONS jis cies: cscs cain annem ain ain asin eimai mR A OD
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 6 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
10.7 Sharing Income from Innovations and INVENTIONS ..........cceceecesceeeeeseeeeeeeeeeseeaeeesesaetssesenees BO
10.8 Equipment Purchased Using External Research FUNS ciscscsscccesssssssasesnsasecnseasevessssvesoossvnex 30
11.0 MISCONDUCT IN RESEARCH ..0.0....cccecccescseseseseeseseseseeseseeeseseseneescseseseeeeseaeeeseeeeseteeeetecseeseseesasaeseeeees O7
11.1 Establishing MiSCONCUCE.........cccccccceseeseseeseeseeseesecsecsecseeseeeeeesecsecsecaeeateeaseseeateaeeateaserseesateaeeeens OT
Tice PPE cee neserseenceermecrxecnencemassae eamenenssamemsnrecensomoncncoan mesma secmremcnnemecranenmemmmamnsn aera OT
11.3 Notification to Funding OrganiZation ue eee eceeeeeeecseeseesceecssesseceesseesssessssssseesseeeeneenees DO
11.4 RECOrds ON MiSCONCUCE ou... cece eceeeesceeeseeseseceeeseeseescessceecaesseesceacssseceaceaeeaeeaeesesteetsaseaseaesstersees DO
12.0 FORCE MAJEURE/ACT OF GOD... cccccceceseseeseeeseeseeeeseeeeseeecseeeeseaeeaeeecesaeeeeeesasesseesasesesteeeeeaees 38
APPENDIX 1: DECLARATION BY THE RESEARCHERS..........cecescseeeseeeeseeeeseeeeseeeteecseeeeeesaeeaseeeesteeeateeeeee 39)
APPENDIX Il: APPLICATION FOR UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FUNDS... ccececeeeeeeseeeeteeseteeeeteneesenenes 39
APPENDIX III: FORMAT FOR RESEARCH PROPOSALS. ..........cccccseseseeseseeeeseeeeeceeceeaeeeeeeseeeesatersateeseeneeeee 42
APPENDIX IV: FORMAT FOR EVALUATION OF RESEARCH PROPOSALS. ..........c:ceseseceeeteeseeteeeteeeeree 45
APPENDIX Vz STANDARD RESEARCH BUDGET FORMAT, sccccnsesssancommnrasresonvarcmemncremmcaememanman SO
APPENDIX VI: RESEARCH CONTRACT FORMAT FOR RESEARCHERS. .........c:ccceeeseeceeeeeeseseeeteeeeeeeeseees 48
APPENDIX Vili RESEARCH PROGRESS REPORT FORMAT sissassss casi sssassassccsnacecasanwezesa srsaviaasancstnrsactaroancee 49
APPENDIX VIII: FORMAT FOR THE FINAL RESEARCH REPORT ............ccceseeeeeeeeteeseteeeeseteteeeteeeeeeeee DL
APPENDIX IX: SCHOOL OF RESEARCH AND POSTGRADUATE STUDIES ORGANOGRAM.............04:52
Appendix X - Guidelines for Accounting for Externally Funded Research..........ccccceseseeteeneeee D3
Appendix XI-Guidelines for Accounting for Internally* Funded Research... cece DD
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 7 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
Acronyms and abbreviations

IRB Institutional Review Board

UGO University Grants Office

UCURF Uganda Christian University Research Fund

URMC University Research Management Committee

R&D Research and Development

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 8 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
1.0 INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND

1.1 Uganda Christian University Vision

A Centre of Excellence in the Heart of Africa

1.2 Uganda Christian University mission

“To Equip Students for Productive, Holistic Lives of Christian Faith and Service”

1.4 Uganda Christian University Research Mandate

The Uganda Christian University Charter (2007, revised in 2019) specifies that one of
the major functions of the University is to provide resources for University education,
training and research. Additionally, the University should conduct research and
encourage the conduct of research which enlarges the domain of human knowledge
in general and increases the effectiveness of the Church in particular. Community
engagement by way of consultative services shall be provided by the believer
scholars of Uganda Christian University.

In order to achieve its mandate in research and extension, Uganda Christian
University through this Research Policy will enable its staff and students to make full
use of all its resources to create a “research culture” consistent with National
development plans and policies.

1.5 The need for a university research policy.

1.5.1 Research activities shall aim at nurturing creativity, inventiveness and
innovativeness among Ugandans for the purposes of human, industrial and
socioeconomic growth and development. An interpretation of these expectations
requires detailed policies and procedures, now contained in this University Research
Policy document.

1.5.2 Despite the importance of research in solving societal problems, research has
traditionally been inadequately funded both at the national and the University level.
Currently less than 1% of the total University income is allocated to research. This
has resulted in limited scholarship by students and staff by way of research
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 9 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
activities, publications in peer reviewed journals, discussion or working papers,

policy briefs and conference proceedings.

1.5.3 The need for a dynamic University Research Policy arises from a number of

other factors: the evaluation from the National Council for Higher Education (NCHE)

regarding the University’s Research output, significant changes in the policies of

major funding agencies both in government and the private sector, need for staff

seeking guidance on research funds and lack of a clear-cut policy on research and

consultancy. Together, these factors have retarded the overall research productivity

at the University and, therefore, the need to have a consistent policy with the desire

to motivate staff, sustain and improve research productivity and competitiveness at

national and international levels.

The policy will achieve this through entrenching a research culture at the University

by:

a) Ensuring sufficient annual allocation of funds to the University Research Budget

b) Recommending deliberate moves to motivate researchers at the University to
seek additional external funding

c) Outlining deliberate efforts to attract substantial external funds from funding
agencies (public and private sectors, and funding agencies) to the University.

d) Promoting a conducive environment for collaboration in research for both
national and international research partnerships.

e) Providing guidance on individual or joint publications.

1.6 Research and Teaching

The University shall emphasize a strong relationship between research and teaching

and shall enhance the role of research in the development of teaching programs and

materials. It shall encourage research based implementation of programmes as well

as demand research based monitoring and evaluation activities. Uganda Christian

University shall seek to provide leadership in the transformation of private

universities from purely teaching into research led universities, where teaching is

informed by research. ,

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 10 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
2.0 RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION POLICY
2.1 General principles
The goal of the research policy is to facilitate the creation of a research culture at
Uganda Christian University. The outcome is expected to be a conversion of research
outputs into publications, innovation and inventions so as to provide teaching that is
informed by the growing body of knowledge that responds to the needs of society.
Research and publications should address issues which are national y, culturally, and
spiritually relevant, that respond to human need.
The policy will support efforts that meet scientific objectives in terms of knowledge
growth. It will also support efforts aimed at addressing emergent problems and
topical issues. The policy will ensure that staff are fully aware of the national
research agenda and participate in the process of drawing up a research agenda in
their disciplines. Writing, consultancy, and publication efforts shall be supported
when they demonstrate clear orientation to the growth of the Kingdom of God,
science, policy or practice.
2.2 Provision and dissemination of knowledge through mentoring and
apprenticeship
Production and dissemination of research products are professional processes which
are best mastered through experience. The policy will therefore encourage,
prioritise and support all senior members of the academic community who are
prepared to work with junior members of staff or their colleagues to produce joint
publications.
2.3 Guarantee quality through using conventional channels of publication.
There are conventional channels of publications that every academic member should
aspire to. These channels are found among publishers that have inbuilt quality
control. The policy shall support all academics to aim first for these channels. For
this purpose, all research output shall be subjected to peer-review before being
‘Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 11 of 56
a
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
disseminated at international, regional and local levels. In addition, authors shall be
expected to identify potential international or regional publishers and write final
manuscripts following editorial guidelines provided.

This policy shall encourage authors to publish their research products in
internationally recognized publishing houses and outlets. This will promote the
outsiders’ understanding of our problems from the local perspective. Quite often our
perspectives are ignored because they are inaccessible or unavailable at conventional
outlets.

2.4 Generate knowledge to put across perspectives that influence national
and regional policy and practice

The policy shall encourage authors to publish their research products about national
issues and in such a form that is usable for policy making and implementation.

The policy shall encourage authors to publish their research products about regional
concerns such as ecumenism, COMESA, EAC, and AU and in such a form that is usable
by relevant communities and regional bodies.

2.5 Publication of Supervised Work

The policy shall encourage publishing undergraduate, Masters and PhD research by
the student or jointly with their supervisors. Every MA and PhD shall be required to
co-publish at least one paper with the supervisor within one year of their graduation.
2.6 Jointly generated work shall be proportionately owned

The policy shall encourage joint writing and publication effort. The ownership of
such effort shall be proportionately shared based on agreed formula by research
teams. In joint work, the originator of the research idea shall be considered as the
first author unless otherwise agreed upon among the parties.

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 12 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
3.0 RESEARCH AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT

3.1 Emphasis on publication and dissemination of knowledge

There is a tendency for academics to consider a research report as a terminal
output. The policy shall encourage authors to complete the process of knowledge
creation and dissemination by publishing their work. For that purpose academic
departments shall ensure that Faculties allocate adequate time for the
dissemination and publication of their research effort.

3.2 Create a research supportive environment in the University

This policy shall contribute to increased academic output by:

e Encouraging and facilitating regional and international collaboration - global
networking.

e Providing research support services including continuous modern management
information systems that facilitate access to international literature and data
bases.

e Creating a stable, internal, conducive research environment. This shall
include the provision of research management support and maintenance of
equipment

e Providing basic financial management support training to research
coordinators as well as personnel in key research administrative units.

e Providing free access to the Internet for purpose of knowledge creation and
dissemination at every academic research unit or team meeting.

e Supporting institutional capacity to disseminate research findings through
internally and externally accessible databases and websites.

3.3 Awards for Publishing

Published books and journal articles will be assessed and rewarded appropriately.
The SRPGS will make annual reports to the Senate. Awards will go to authors who
succeed in publishing their research output with the more competitive international
and regional publishers.

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 13 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
3.4 Academic staff account for their contribution to knowledge
development every three years.

There is an emerging tendency for academic staff to spend disproportionately more
time in teaching and student assessment to the detriment of knowledge creation and
dissemination. This has deprived Uganda Christian University of research based
teaching and quality supervision. The policy requires every academic member of
staff to produce at least two research publications or scholarly innovation every
contract period. After the expiry of a scholar’s contract, they should show cause why
they have not published or been involved in research activities.

3.5 Research Agenda

Uganda Christian University shall generate a research agenda on a periodic basis
based on priorities of academic departments and Faculties.

3.6 Occasional Papers

a) The policy requires the University, Faculties and Institutes to formulate
research priorities leading to a university research agenda.

b) The priorities shall reflect national research objectives, church priorities and
relevant international trends. The research agenda will be reviewed within a
period of five years.

c) To energize the academic community and to keep Uganda Christian University
community on top of current topics of national concern, the policy proposes
commissioning of annual competitive occasional papers to respond to urgent
knowledge needs by Uganda Christian University.

4.0 CO-ORDINATION OF RESEARCH

a) Where necessary research proposals seeking external or internal grants will be
channelled through the School of Research and Postgraduate Studies (SRPGS)
in accordance with the UCU policy on academic and research collaboration

~ and the UCU guidelines on submission of externally funded projects.

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 14 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
b) Where applications are forwarded to donors via website, or on-line, the
researchers are encouraged to notify the SRPGS who may follow up the
progress of such applications on behalf of the applicants.

c) All research projects within the University should be recorded in the University
database which will be updated regularly.

4.1 School of Research and Postgraduate Studies Activities

The University will source funds for the development, maintenance and for the day
to day running of the University Research, Publications and Consultancy Centre. The
SRPGS will offer the following services and products among others:

Research

e Generation of knowledge for teaching purposes through conference
presentations, consultancy and publications

e Provision of academic support to faculty and postgraduate students in all
phases of their research: proposal writing, data collection, data analysis and
report writing.

e Provision of specialized equipment for field research: audio and video
recorders and transcribing machines

e Strengthening of local and international research networks.

Publication

e Edit and publish academic publications

e Host regional and international journals

e Plan and implement academic conferences and publish proceedings

e Disseminate research findings

e Facilitate publications of monographs

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 15 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
Consultancy

e Coordinate research projects for local churches, Christian
organizations and other community-based organizations or
industry.

e Facilitate short courses in proposal writing and research and
consultancy

e Host and facilitate local and international visiting researchers in conducting
their research projects

In addition to the services above the SRPGS will:

e Avail common equipment, conference facilities and other facilities to the
University research community.

e Provide for modality of research coordination at Uganda Christian University.

e Host a research centre where researchers can have access to computers,
software and Internet for use as they carry out their research.

e Establish a media unit of the Centre to work with the relevant organs of the
University in terms of communication and publicity. It will be responsible for
storing the research findings in video recordings, books, CD-ROM’s,

| publications, and audiotapes or in any other retrievable forms. The unit will
also post the research findings in the Uganda Christian University Research
Centre webpage. Copies of relevant documents will be archived in the Library.
e Assist staff on drawing up contracts.
e Support the development of fundable research project proposals.
4.2 Office of the Dean, School of Research and Postgraduate Studies
Among other functions, the Dean, School of Research and Postgraduate Studies will:

a) Provide information on possible sources of funding to the Uganda Christian
University community on a regular basis and especially alert researchers on
international funding opportunities such as those arising from bilateral and

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 16 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
multinational agreements. Scrutinize national, government and provincial
tender bulletins - for research contracts and inform researchers accordingly.

b) Strengthen institutional capacity for strategic technical training and
operational planning, and administration of research at the University
including information management systems, budgeting, and control for
research.

c) Provide support in approaching funding agencies.

d) Encourage regional and international collaboration - global university /
research networking. Establish international funding opportunities.

e) To identify newsworthy research items and to produce regular copies for
distribution to the media and potential funders.

f) Encourage and facilitate solicitation of funding at individual, departmental,
faculty (school) or Institute levels.

g) Equip a core office responsible for the overall research coordination at the
University level. This shall mean strengthening and equipping the department
with skilled personnel in proposal writing, data analysis and manuscript
editing.

h) Ensure that staff are fully involved in the research planning process and
maintain a good balance between teaching, research and consultancy.

i) Ensure that staff are fully aware of the national research agenda and
participate in the process of defining the research agenda for their areas of
research.

j) Create mechanism for management of funds of research and publications.

k) Make suggestions on who will comprise the editorial board to the SRPGS who
forward the names to Senate for appointment.

\) Sign all research contracts between the University and the researcher. Also
keep copies of all research contracts irrespective of the source and level of
funding.

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 17 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
4.3 Research Committees

For research policy and promotion purposes, there shall be a university research
committee of Senate and for coordination purposes there shall be a Research
Management Committee and Faculty Research Committees.

4.3.1 The University Research Committee

a) Comprising of UCU and non UCU members, the committee will have the following
terms of reference:

1. Receive Quarterly Reports on ongoing research in the University.

2. Develop, monitor, and review university policies concerned with research
activities, such as research and research training, research collaboration and
international reputation.

3. Help identify and cultivate how the University can take advantage of the
available research opportunities, with the aim of increasing and maximising
income generated from research activities.

4, Generate strategies to enable the University to meet its research objectives as
articulated in its Strategy.

5. Provide guidance, monitoring and review of the SRPGS research sub-
committees (i.e., the Research Management Committee, The Doctoral
Committee, The Research Ethics Committee, Research Forum, Research
Monitoring Committee and Faculty Research Committees).

6. Guide the development of the University’s strategic research priorities and
objectives and monitor research performance within the framework of the
University’s Strategic Planning process.

7. Conduct a triennial review of submissions for formation and/or continuation of
University Research priorities and advise on funding allocations to, SRPGS-
funded research groups.

8. Give oversight to research funding proposals to ensure growth of the research
function in each Faculty/School.

9. Receive reports on accountability for both internal and external Research
Funds. |

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 18 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
10. Offer leadership and advice on mechanisms for improving how the university
research performance can be monitored and reported on.

11.Advise UCU scholars on how to effectively publish, disseminate and
communicate their research, within and outside the university.

12.Do all other supervisory functions in the University that are congruent to
research promotion in the University.

b) The composition of the Committee

1. Deputy Vice Chancellor- Academic Affairs

2. Dean SRPGS

3. 2 Members of Council

4. Faculty Research Cordinators

5. Four other members nominated by the Vice Chancellor

4.3.2 The University Research Management Committee

a) This committee shall comprise the Dean, School of Research and Postgraduate
Studies, all Deans of Faculties, the University Librarian and any other Faculty
representative (s) appointed from among the teaching staff.

e The Vice Chancellor will be the chairperson to this committee.
e The Grants Officer will be in attendance.

b) The Committee will be co-chaired by the Dean, School of Research and
Postgraduate Studies. The Chairperson will appoint the Secretary of the
Committee from among the members.

c) The Faculty representatives will serve for two years. They will however be
eligible for re-appointment.

d) The Research Management Committee will have jurisdiction over research
matters. Its functions will be to:

(i) | Approve funds under Uganda Christian University Research Fund
(UCURF).
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 19 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
(ii) Set guidelines on ethics in research and publications and establish
misconduct criteria in research and determine the penalty

(iii) | Encourage continuous policy review.

(iv) Oversee consultancy and contracts related to research and research
product development.

(v) Oversee protection of intellectual property rights.

(vi) Create, develop and sustain a conducive environment for research.

(vii) Create a mechanism for dialogue with the government, in cooperation
with other stakeholders, for an increased share of research funding.

(viii) Encourage and facilitate the establishment of professional research
chairs in Faculties and Institutes and create formal linkages with these
research units.

(ix) | Monitor and evaluate research activities

(x) Profile centres of excellence.

(xi) | Give financial approvals for:

e Inaugural lecture preparation.
e Post-doctoral research.
4.3.3 The Faculty Research Committee
a) This shall comprise of appointed representatives from the departments in the

Faculty, appointed representatives from the Faculty Board and shall be run

under the Dean of Faculty.

b) The Faculty Research Committee’s functions will be to:-

i) Evaluate applications for project funding, purchase of capital
equipment, publication awards and conference attendance before
forwarding to the SRPGS.

ii) Encourage research opportunities between departments and across
disciplines.

iii) | Establish discipline specific guidelines and ensure adherence to that.

, iv) Take initiative for external funding. |
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 20 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
Vv) Investigate misconduct in research and determining whether the
allegations form a basis for investigation.

Vi) Assist researchers in responding to tenders from government and the
private sector.

vii) Assist researchers in drawing up specific proposals.

viii) Liaise with the SRPGS to send regular briefings to potential funders.

4.3.4 The Research Ethics Committee

It is important to have in place a system that promotes beneficial research and

guards against unethical research. Oversight of research involving humans as

research participants in Uganda is done first at the organizational level by Research

Ethics Committees (RECs) and second at the national level by UNCST in collaboration

with Uganda National Health Research Organization (UNHRO) for research in health.

Uganda Christian University (UCU), shall have a Research Ethics Committee (REC)

accredited by The Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST) to

review and oversee all research activities involving human subjects in her catchment
area. The committee membership will be set up following the guidelines of the

Uganda National Council for Science and Technology.

4.4 Administration of Research Grants

a) For all the internal grants, the Dean, School of Research and Postgraduate Studies
shall, on behalf of the University, sign a contract with the Principal Investigator
for the purposes of accountability and management of the funds.

b) For all externally funded projects, the Principal Investigator and Vice Chancellor
or his.or her representative on behalf of University shall sign a contract with the
funding agency and a copy of the contract will be kept in the Dean, School of
Research and Postgraduate Studies office for purposes of management of funds
and project activities.

c) Upon signing of a contract, the University shall be entitled to receive a minimum
of 10% of the total grant awarded to the Principal Investigator (Pl), being

payment for administration costs. This will happen except in those cases where

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 21 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
the funding agency requests to waive this 10% or wants to pay administrative
costs more than 10% of the total grant.
d) The University Research Management Committee (RMC) shall be
entitled to award all internal grants to staff and make a report to
Senate accordingly.
e) The PI shall submit semi-annual financial and technical reports to
the Dean, SRPGS as follows:-
i) Three copies of technical report detailing the work accomplished,
project results and any recommendations for further research
ii) A complete financial statement, covering all funds expended on the
project, in the same form and including the detail of the budget and
certified as true copy by the PI.
4.5 Declaration by the Researcher
The University Research community shall be required to be committed to the values
and regulations established by the Uganda Christian University Research Policy and
shall be required to sign a declaration form. (See Appendix 1)
5.0 UGANDA CHRISTIAN UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FUND (UCURF)
The Council, as it approves the annual budget, will ensure that sufficient amounts of
funds are set aside annually for various research activities. These activities form
part of core business activities of the University that complements teaching and gives
the University national and international recognition.
5.1 Broad Principles of the Uganda Christian University Research Fund
For purposes of disbursement of funds under UCURF, the following
principles will apply:
a) The need to support original, strategic, basic, applied and productive research.
b) The provision of an internal research budget in terms of its potential to leverage
external funding for university research.
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 22 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
c) The development of strategic research foci and centres of excellence.

d) The need to support and develop postgraduate students and academic staff at
the beginning of their research careers.

e) Multi-disciplinarity in problem solving through research partnerships internally
between faculties and departments or with external partners. The UCU
collaboration policy should be applied when working with external partners.

f) Rewarding publication and demonstrated research excellence to motivate staff.

g) Capacity building for the University

5.2 Sources, Allocation and Distribution of Research Funds from UCURF
(i) |The University shall aim at setting aside a minimum of 3 % from tuition funds or
the minimum required by NCHE; being its annual allocation, to research and
publication activities to be distributed as shown below:
(a) 60% to be given out as Annual Research Grant.
(b) | 20% to be spent on publications.
(c) | 10% to be spent on conferences to disseminate research findings.
(d) | 10% to be spent on normal running of other activities at the SRPGS.
* This is a guideline depending on the need of the SRPGS at the time.
5.3 Apportionment of Annual Research Grant (ARG)
The ARG shall be used for:
(a) Training of researchers to be able to participate in competitive
research.
(b) | Funding competitive research or project proposals.
(c) | Awards and recognitions.
(d) | Uganda Christian University Annual Research Conference.
5.4 Training of Researchers to be able to participate in competitive
research
Researchers will be exposed to research techniques and methodologies through
attendance of workshops and seminars organized at the University. SRPGS will scan
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 23 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
the research environment and academic visitors in the country and invite specialists
from within and without the University to train participants on current research
methodologies. This opportunity will prepare the researchers to participate in
bidding for competitive project proposals.
5.5 Funding Competitive Research and/or Project Proposals
Research proposals will be received and considered every six months. Projects
designed to run for more than one year will be considered provided there is
satisfactory progress, which must be demonstrated annually.
Thereafter, annual applications must be made by the appropriate closing date.
Allocations will depend on the merits of proposals set by the University Research
Committee and on the publication and general research record of the applicants. In
assessing proposals, evaluators will be guided by some or all of the following
principles, depending on the discipline and the nature of the project:
i) Originality and potential to contribute to the generation of new knowledge;
ii) Transferability of knowledge to enable enhanced classroom Course
instruction.
iii) | The involvement of several staff and/or postgraduate students working on a
common theme;
iv) The development of new research foci which have the potential to develop
academic and research excellence;
v) Multi-disciplinarity as an approach to problem-solving;
vi) Preference to applicants who have attracted funding for the project from
outside sources;
vii) | Focus towards fulfilling the Uganda Christian University vision and mission.
viii) Impact on the community/society.
Initial screening of applications will be done by the Faculty Research Committee with
recommendations being made for final approval based on advice from the
Committee. Where necessary, the University Research Management Committee will
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 24 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
refine the criteria for evaluation of proposals in keeping with the broad principles
outlined above.

6.0 INTERNALLY AND EXTERNALLY FUNDED RESEARCH

6.1 General framework guiding the preparations and approval of research
procedures.

The framework addresses the following issues or processes:

i. Initiation of a research project;

ii. Formats of research proposals. A sample format is included in Appendix III;

iii. Scrutiny and approval process for research proposals shall focus on relevance,
need, soundness and resources requirements (including financial resources).
This will clearly spell out the roles and powers of different units within the
relevant University administrative hierarchy. An example of a research proposal
evaluation form is included in Appendix IV.

iv. Planning and budgeting guidelines, including applicable rates for cost
estimates. An example of the budgeting format is included in Appendix V;

v. Financial regulations governing financing of research; procurement of
equipment and consumables. These have to be within relevant University
procurement policies and procedures and in principle all equipment is the
property of Uganda Christian University;

vi. Registration of research equipment - whether from internal or external sources;

vii.Standard contracts between the funding agency, the University and the
researcher (s). An example of a research contract is included in Appendix VI;

viii. Regulations regarding employment within research projects. These have to be
within approved Human Resource Management (HRM) policies;

ix. Progress reporting requirements, control and monitoring. (See Appendix VII)

x. Ensure that all research proposals which are funded through Uganda Christian
University are subjected to research process. See Appendix VIII for the format of
the research report.

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 25 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
xi. Enter into a research contract with the researcher when the project has been
approved. (Contract form is suggested in Appendix VI). Where there is an
interest of joint ownership of research results or output, the contract shall be
between the researcher as one party and joint financiers as the other party.

6.2 Attraction of External Funds.

The University shall recognize in an appropriate way the efforts in generating
research grants from external funding sources (private sector or funding agencies)
by taking this effort into consideration while undertaking the annual performance
reviews.

i. Ensure that the research overhead contribution is shared amongst the research
administrative units at the various administrative levels. Sharing of the
administrative overheads shall ensure that priority is given to where the
research activity is taking place. In this respect, the distributions shall be as
follows:

a) a minimum of 3% of the overhead shall be contributed to Research, Grants
management and Publications Unit of the SRPGS,

b) 4% of the overhead to the Pl

c) 2% of the overhead to the respective Department of the PI and

d) 1% of the overhead to the University.

6.3 Sharing of research resources.

Uganda Christian University shall:

6.2.1 Require that Faculties and departments have transparent and objective criteria
of making research opportunities known to members of staff and for allocating
such opportunities.

6.2.2 Encourage sharing of research project resources in order to utilize fully the
available research resources.

6.2.3 Encourage and coordinate sharing of information and information sources of
academic value. Such source shall include books, journals, electronic

information (e.g. CD-ROM) and sources of such electronic information through
the Internet.

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 26 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
6.2.4 Facilitate by setting up procedures for utilizing project research facilities for
other tasks or research projects. This may be necessary where research project
resources are underutilized e.g. project vehicles, computers, photocopiers etc.

6.2.5 Encourage and facilitate common services such as word processing, data
summary and analysis services.

6.2.6 Permit a researcher to retain priority access to equipment for confirmed
academic growth and publication of research.

6.2.7 Where facilities are shared the running costs should be met by the participating
units.

6.4 Staff Remuneration

a) Staff will be remunerated for research activity to make research financially

attractive as compensation for opportunity cost. This shall be implemented within

the context of the “evidence based on professional services” advanced in the

Uganda Christian University mission statement. Honorarium shall be paid to staff

who work outside normal working hours at the rate written in the proposal budget

and approved by the Research Management Committee or the funders. The
approval shall be on a case by case basis.

b) Where applicable, staff may apply for a reduced teaching workload to enable

them participate and complete a major externally funded research project.

c) The taxation requirement for monetary compensation shall be applied

consistently to all members of the research teams.

6.5 Internal Procedures for Approval, Control and Monitoring of research

Projects.

6.4.1 Priority will be given priority to projects within the main research agenda
when approving research funding. Research proposals must demonstrate
that they are within the stated agenda.

6.4.2 To ensure relevancy, collaborative and interdisciplinary research projects
shall be promoted. . .

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 27 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
6.4.3 Ensure that the output for publication conforms to international or regional
publishers editorial guidelines. See example of a format for a research
report included in Appendix VII.

6.4.4 Research proposals submitted to the SRPGS will be funded subject to the
following conditions:

a) Relevance of the Topic- The topic should fit within the mission, vision
and research agenda of the University.

b) Availability of Funds- Those projects whose budget can be fully met by
the SRPGS will be given priority. This is to ensure that we do not start
projects we cannot finish.

c) Completion Time-The research should not last more than one year.
This is to ensure that we are able to complete all projects within each
financial year. Any extension shall need approval from the Research
Monitoring Committee. Ph.D. candidates may only apply in their last
year of study. By then, they should have crystallised their ideas and
that neither their academic work nor the research project will be
affected negatively if awarded a research grant with our conditions.

d) Measurable Time Lag-The project proposal should clearly indicate a
measurable phase that can and will be evaluated before further funding
is approved. In other words, while a project will be approved in whole,
funds will be released in phases and the researcher will have to satisfy
the committee that the project is on target. The aim of this provision
is to make sure that projects that are non-functional, in spite of the

- proposals having been brilliant, are discontinued and that therefore no
project will be fully funded unless it will deliver results.

e) Length of Proposal-The proposal submission should not be more than
15 pages.

f) Competence of Researcher- The researcher should demonstrate
competence in doing the research proposed.

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 28 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
g) Publication Potential-The research must end up as a publication. The
applicant should therefore demonstrate the publication potential of
the anticipated findings.

h) New members of staff & faculty - Funding may be applied for after
the first year of appointment.

6.6 Research Contract and Funding.

An approved research proposal shall only be funded once the researcher(s) has signed
a contract with appropriate offices. In any case, the contracts signed at the SRPGS
level shall be deemed to be contracts with the University. Format for research
contracts is included in Appendix VI. Original copies of research contracts shall be
signed by the Dean, SRPGS irrespective of the source and level of funding.

6.7 Interim Progress Reports.

At the end of each phase, the researchers shall be required to produce interim
progress reports giving the up-to-date research findings through the SRPGS. A format
for such progress reports is given as Appendix VII of these guidelines.

If, because of the progress report, there is need to modify the contract (or schedule
of payments), this request should be formally made through and recommended to
the Dean, SRPGS.

In some cases, the SRPGS might wish to send the interim report(s) to an independent
reviewer before approving the next phase. Such cases will involve research projects
handling massive data that is not easy to interpret or research projects involved in
very technological developments not well established in the department concerned.
However, in any case, the funds for the next phase can only be released after the
approval of the progress report by Research Management Committee.

6.8 Final Research Report.

At the conclusion of the research, a final research report shall be submitted in the
format of standalone chapters to facilitate the progress from research to publication.
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 29 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
This shall include chapters organized as academic journal manuscripts. A sample of
the contents of the Report appears at Appendix VIII.

6.8 Research seminars and Lectures.

The researchers shall be required to give a seminar or conference at the conclusion
of their research work and shall also be encouraged to give periodic seminars during
the research work. The seminar and or conference presentation will in principle be
the last item to be handled by the researcher(s) after completion of the exercise of
reviewing the final draft report. This shall be a pre-condition for the release of the
final payment to the researcher(s).

UCU shall also scan the national and international academic environment and invite
prominent persons to present at the annual UCU public lectures and other regular
public lectures as may be deemed necessary by the university.

Visiting academic visiting professors shall be expected to present a lecture towards
the end of their visiting tenure.

7.0 AWARDS AND RECOGNITION

7.1 Publications, Inventions and Innovations

The University shall reward the best publication arising from its staff as per the
SRPGS’ recommendation. The University shall also reward innovators who have
achieved excellent transfer of technology or knowledge and are not necessarily
academic publications. There shall be the Chancellor’s award, Vice Chancellor’s
award and Dean’s award during the Uganda Christian University’s Research
Conference.

7.2 Uganda Christian University Annual Research Conference

Uganda Christian University shall organize an annual research conference for the
purpose of disseminating research findings.

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 30 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
7.2.1 University Refereed Journals

Uganda Christian University shall support journals to publish and disseminate
research findings resulting from research in and outside the university. Leading
scholars in the respective fields shall be sought to referee the journals. The
University shall establish an internationally recognised interdisciplinary major
publication to provide an avenue for her staff and that of other Ugandan researchers
to disseminate their research findings.

7.2.2 Other University Publications

Manuscripts for publication shall be reviewed by selected professionals in the field
who shall be compensated for the work done.

7.2.3 Expensive Capital Equipment

The University shall strive to obtain equipment for research for all Departments. Any
Expensive Capital Equipment (ECE) funds shall be considered in the light of the policy
on developing research foci and “centres of excellence” (see 7.2.7) where there are
more people capable of using the expensive equipment. When internal funds are not
available, researchers shall be encouraged to collaborate with other universities or
industry when ECE is required.

7.2.4 Research Extension Funds

10% of the Uganda Christian University Research Fund (UCURF) shall be allocated for
research and extension. Such funds will be used for research in community
development projects, innovation, partnerships with industry and other stakeholders
and the development of networks and leverage skills amongst staff.

7.2.6 Matching Funds/Grants

Where University contribution will be required as a condition for funding, RMC shall
consider such applications.

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 31 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
7.2.7 Developing Centres of Research Excellence.

The University shall optimize its resources by identifying the research foci and
developing these as clusters or “centres” of academic research excellence. An
appropriate process of profiling such centres will take into account existing research
strengths as well as regional and national needs. The SRPGS shall identify such
centres of excellence within the University, including the Regional Colleges.

The defining features of research foci and centres will be:

a) The existence of (or the potential for) maintaining sustained research
programs, which are characterised by excellence in publication and in training
of graduate students.

b) Collaboration and multidisciplinarity between a number of researchers within
and without the University such that a distinct “research density” is clearly
present. This would be achieved by sharing of resources and specialized
equipment not normally available for each school.

c) The number of patents (or potential patents) achieved and leading to
commercial products.

d) Productive researchers whose work may not necessarily be associated with the
centres will continue to be supported through project funding and publication
awards of URF.

Preferential investments in expensive capital equipment will be made to such nodes
of research excellence.

8.0 RESEARCH FINDINGS AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

This section should be read together with the Uganda Christian University Intellectual
Property Policy (UCUIP).

8.1 Records of Research Findings

The research findings may be stored as video recordings, books, CD-ROM’s,
publications, and audiotapes or in any other retrievable forms in the UCU Hamu
*Mukasa Library. ,

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 32 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
8.2 Retention of Documents
The University shall retain a database within the Research and Publications Centre
of all research findings. The Principal investigators have the obligation to ensure
that sufficient records are kept to document the experimental methods and
accuracy of data interpretation and to provide a basis of further research. Copies of
research findings and abstracts shall be submitted to open databases such as those
maintained by Association of African Universities (AAU) for dissemination among
local and regional Universities.
Documents shall be forwarded by the Departments and Faculties to the School of
Research and Postgraduate Studies and copies given out to the University Library,
for archiving for a period not less than 5 years or as long as the University requires
to protect any patent resulting from the research.
8.3 Access and Use of Research Findings
The research materials shall be available for reference within the Research Centre
and Library unless any material is protected by client who owns the copyright. It
shall be available for copying electronically or by photocopying. The person asking
for it will meet the cost of copying. |
All research findings and publications in hard copies, electronic copies, audio typing
or video tapes shall be available for use by members of the University for purposes of
research and teaching with permission from the author or University.
8.4 Intellectual Property Rights
For any research findings or innovations that are patentable, the University shall
pursue patent rights and the University policy on patent rights will apply thereafter.
9.0 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

, The Research Management Committee of Senate is committed to promoting research ‘
that conforms to internationally recognized ethical principles. In pursuit of this ideal,
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 33 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
all research proposals presented for possible funding through the University Research
Fund shall have undergone ethical review and approval by a duly constituted and
competent body. All proposals on research involving human subjects shall be
reviewed by the UCU Research Ethics Committee (REC) and any relevant government
authorities as required.

10.0 UNIVERSITY / PRIVATE SECTOR FUNDING RESEARCH

The establishment and maintenance of research relationships with private sector or
industry will be facilitated if both parties recognize the mission of the University and
the policies and principles that guide its actions. The research undertaken jointly by
the University and the private sector should aim at creating new knowledge and
solutions while maintaining integrity and independence of both parties. More details
are in the Uganda Christian University IPR Policy.

10.1 Acceptance of a Research Project

The University will accept a research project if it is considered to be in the

University’s best interest to do the research.

10.2 Limits on the Sponsors’ Power

The research sponsors may reasonably define broadly the project they wish to

support while the University Principal Investigator will have the discretion in

designing, controlling and modifying their sponsored research.

10.3 Publications

Since the purpose of research is to generate new knowledge, and communicate the
findings through publications, the freedom to publish must be vigorously guarded.
The findings of the researches carried out by the University should be published in
the shortest time possible. The funding organization may review the results and
materials resulting from the research. Such reviews should not delay publication for
more than 180 days from the date they are asked to review for publication. Where
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 34 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
the research findings may lead to patentable rights, the University and the private

sector funding the research will pursue the patents and the University policy on

patent rights will apply thereafter.

Agreements to treat as confidential information generated by research done at the

University will be unacceptable unless consistent with University’s missions, rules, or

policies and will be granted with approval of Vice-Chancellor.

10.4 Graduate Student Involvement in Private Sector Research

When research involves confidentiality, the students may be constrained from

publishing their results freely because the results may involve handling of proprietary

information. Students shall participate in projects that are funded by the private
sector under supervision by Uganda Christian University faculty.

10.5 Conflict of Interest

Conflict of interest occurs when a member of the University community has a

research relationship that requires a commitment of time, effort or resources to non-

University activities such that the individual cannot meet the usual obligations to the

University, OR when the Researcher has a personal vested interest in the subject or

objects of the research. ;

If any such relationship exists it should be declared at the beginning of the

engagement. Therefore, Members of Uganda Christian University undertaking

research shall immediately declare any conflict of interest and sign a Form to that
effect. All effort must be taken to avoid relationships which constitute a conflict of
interest or a conflict of commitment.

10.6 Ownership of Inventions

For the purpose of encouraging scientific research,

a) Inventions resulting from research or other work where some University
resources or time have been involved will be considered joint researcher and
University property. Ownership will be shared depending on the percentage of
resources committed by individual. .

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 35 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
b) Inventions resulting from research or other work commissioned by the
University will be considered University property.

C) An employee may apply for rights of the innovations and the Vice-Chancellor in
consultation with the University Research Committee will decide whether to
grant such rights.

d) Where research was funded by a private sector or industry, innovations will be
owned jointly by the funding organization and the University, and this shall be
stipulated in the agreements governing the partnership.

10.7 Sharing Income from Innovations and Inventions

Income resulting from innovation and or inventions will be shared following the

University policy on Patent Rights.

10.8 Equipment Purchased Using External Research Funds

10.8.1 Purchasing of Equipment

All research equipment unless supplied by the donor, shall be purchased following

the normal University procedure on purchase of equipment. The University

nonetheless shall assure quality on donated equipment.

10.8.2 Ownership of Equipment

All equipment purchased through research grants shall become University property

and designated to the department of the applicant at the completion of the project

unless otherwise specified in the project proposal. Vehicles bought through project
funds shall become University property on purchase but exclusively used on the
project, or thereafter designated to the researcher’s Department/Faculty.

10.8.3 Repairs ,

All repairs on equipment shall be undertaken by the project until the end of the

project, and thereafter revert to the University. Where the cost of repairing

equipment exceeds the budgeted allocation, the University will supplement for
repairs through university votes. |

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 36 of 56

I |
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
11.0 MISCONDUCT IN RESEARCH

Uganda Christian University aims at fostering an atmosphere of honesty, trust and
collaboration between researchers and the highest ethical standards in all research
work. This will improve the quality and quantity of research and avoid jeopardizing
the reputation of the University and possibly damaging the researcher’s career.
Misconduct in research is defined as fabrication, falsification, stealing, plagiarism or
any other form of irregularity that is against the Uganda Christian University Code of
Conduct. Misconduct practices as defined above result in mistrust about the research
undertaken. Where misconduct in research is noted, the researcher may be called to
appear before disciplinary proceedings and if found guilty, disciplinary action shall
be taken. Misconduct will not include honest error, honest differences in
interpretation or judgment of data.

11.1 Establishing Misconduct

Where misconduct is reported, the University Research Management Committee will
form an inquiry into the allegations to determine if the issues which form the basis of
. the allegations are appropriate for consideration as misconduct.

The report of the findings will be forwarded to the University Research Committee.
The University Research Committee shall give the respondent an opportunity to
respond to the allegations and determine if any misconduct has been committed.
Both shall report on allegations and the findings of their investigations to the
university staff tribunal.

11.2 Penalty

If misconduct in research is found, the Staff tribunal shall determine appropriate
penalty, and recommend the same to Senate for consideration and necessary action.
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 37 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
11.3 Notification to Funding Organization

On the basis of the determination that there is misconduct in research, the
Chairperson of Senate shall inform the sponsoring entity or funding agency in writing,
and if possible, another researcher appointed to replace the researcher who is found
guilty.

11.4 Records on Misconduct

All documents related to misconduct in research will become permanent institutional
records and will be maintained according to the policy of the University.

12.0 FORCE MAJEURE/ACT OF GOD

Non-performance of a research that has been undertaken by a member of staff and
or student under any given contract shall be excused to the extent that such
performance is prevented by circumstances beyond the reasonable control of Uganda
Christian University or the funding agency. The circumstances may include strike,
fire, flood, lighting, windstorm, explosion, earthquake, catastrophic climatic
conditions, act of nature or public enemy, war, insurrection, revolution,
governmental regulation, order of decree, uncontrollable delay in transport, inability
to obtain necessary materials, failure or destruction, in whole or in part, of
machinery or equipment, labor shortage, collision, grave illness, death, discontinuity
in supply of power, epidemic or pandemic or any other cause, beyond the reasonable
control of the parties.

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 38 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
APPENDICES
APPENDIX 1: DECLARATION BY THE RESEARCHER:
| senreremansianeurer eecereeeeerererereerenrervenerresvensiveemnnversesnsmnemessssssasscasssanassasting s TD) DAES cnnencecennoveeyernmraree
Declare that | have read the Uganda Christian University Research Policy and
understood its content and meaning, and | undertake to abide by it.
Signed by Researcher... eee DATE ceccecesceseseseeeees
Department OF Faculty sccisssicssnscercsscccsrssxessomemaasncsssnmasnncnca
Witness: Head of Department or Dean of Faculty un. eceescceteeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeees
Dean, SRPGSS ou... cc cecesseccstsessccesesesneseecceecesacessecsseeesecesesees
APPENDIX II: APPLICATION FOR UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FUNDS
“SAMPLE”
1. Research
Title -
e Communication /Media
e Religion /Christianity
2. Theme of
e Health & Nutrition
Application
e Environmental Issues
(Tick one)
e Community Development
e Language /Arts
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 39 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
e Education / Christian Education
e Human Resource Development
e Socio-Cultural Issues
e Entrepreneurship / Business
e Psychology / Counselling
e ICT
e Others (specify)
Name: Department:
3. Personal Highest qualification:
details of the
Principal Office Tel: Fax:
Researcher
Ee.
4. a) Funds requested (Ush.)
Equipment = and
es es ee ee
Institution |Area
PE
8. Research Design (itemize how the research objectives will be achieved and
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 40 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
11. Details of Expenditure

i) Equipment and Facilities

Other Expenses

ii) Consumables
e Travel & Subsistence (Destination, No. of persons and

Total (UGX.)
days and cost)
e Personnel and other costs Total (UGX.)

12. Expected Outputs

13.Socio- Economic Impact of Proposed Research (if applicable)

14. Dissemination of research findings (include the mechanisms to be used)

15. List of Relevant Publications by Researchers for the past five (5) years and not
more than five (5) papers per researcher (Author(s), (Year) Title, Publisher,
Volume, Pages

DECLARATION

Submitted by the Principal Researcher

Signature & Date

Head of Department

Signature Date

Dean of Faculty

Signature & Date

'  *Attach 1 page abstract
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 41 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
APPENDIX III: FORMAT FOR RESEARCH PROPOSALS

1.0 Title of the Project.
The title should be scientifically valid and sufficiently descriptive to reflect the
nature of the proposed work. The title of the project once approved cannot be
changed or modified without consent of the University Research Management
Committee.

2.0 Summary of the Project
A summary of the proposed project should be submitted taking into account the
objectives, methodologies and the budget. Considerable attention should be given to
the preparation of this item. It is suggested that you write this item last.

3.0 Objectives of the project
A clear statement of the general problem(s) or issue(s) at hand should be given
Strategic goal(s) to which the solution of the stated problem(s) will contribute should
be explicitly stated. Specific objectives and targets must be clearly stated in order to
facilitate monitoring and evaluation of the project.

4.0 Literature Review and Contribution of Project
The research applicant must show the interrelationship of what has been done by
others in the field and what he or she intends to do. It should reflect a thorough
survey of the existing state of knowledge and how in which way the intended work is
going to contribute to the advancement of knowledge in the context of the problem
to be solved or bring about socio-economic development.

5.0 Methodology
The researcher should clearly and thoroughly spell out the research plan for the
project. The plans should identify and describe the different phases of the project. It
should also indicate that the proposed methods and analytical techniques are

feasible. This section should also show the relationship of his or her project to other ©

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 42 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
on-going projects in as far as sharing of physical facilities, equipment and data is
concerned.

6.0 Project Duration
The anticipated duration of the project must be given to enable the appropriate
Uganda Christian University organs to set aside the funds approved for the duration.
It will also assist in drawing up monitoring schedules. A Gantt chart showing the
major phases of the project could be helpful but not required.

7.0 Organizational and Management Plan.
The details and rationale for human resource needs, budget requested, work
schedules and organizational structure of the project should be given here. Ghant
charts and key decision points should be used to illustrate the research plan,
including contingency plans.

8.0 Anticipated Output and Utilization Plan
Specific solutions to the specific problem(s) or issue(s) that were addressed in the
research projects constitute the anticipated output of the project. These outputs
must tally with the objectives spelt out. In this section discussions on the steps
already taken or planned to be taken to utilize the research results must be given. It
should clearly list direct and indirect beneficiaries of the research output.

9.0 Education and Training Components
Specific educational and training requirements and programs geared at improving the
professional capability of the staff involved in the project should be discussed in this
section.

10.0Facilities and Funding
The applicant should show the breakdown of all funds requested under the following:
equipment (type of equipment and costs); travel (fares and places to be visited);
others (specify). Where the applicant has applied for funds from some other sources
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 43 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
he or she should specify the name of the organization, the date of application, the
amount requested and its planned use.
11.0Justification or Rationale
This section should clearly show the importance of the project by stating that the
anticipated benefits of the project exceed the expected expenditure. The proposal
should also show how the results of the research would be able to reach the end
users and bring about socio-economic development. The researcher should discuss
the following issues as they relate to his/her project: -
e Technical feasibility
e Research costs
e Relevance
e Researchability
e Contribution to long-term capability building
e Probability of research success
e Availability of outside scientific inputs.
12.0Publication
Indicate where and in which form the results of the work may be disseminated or
published.
13.0Work Plan
The proposal should indicate the roles of the key researchers and timing of their
involvement. The plan should clearly show the role of the principal investigator.
14.0 Budget
The estimated budget for the research proposal should be itemized and presented in
a clear format as shown in Appendix V.
15.0Curriculum Vitae
Where deemed necessary, CVs of the key researchers shall be attached to the
proposal. .
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 44 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
APPENDIX IV: FORMAT FOR EVALUATION OF RESEARCH PROPOSALS
1. SUMMARY YES NO

[ ] [ ] is clear and concise
Comments:
2. LITERATURE REVIEW [ ]} [ ] Comprehensive, relevant and up to
date
Comments:
3. GOALS & OBJECTIVES [ ] [ ] Clearly stated, priority clear and
objectives achievable
Comments:
4. STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM = AND RATIONALE

[ ] [ ] Clearly stated and proposal is well

reasoned out.

Comments:
5. METHODOLOGY [ ] [ ] Proper, well designed and related to all
objectives stated
Comments:
6. PERSONNEL (CVs) [ ] [ ] The applicant is scientifically and technically
capable. ©
Comments:
7. BUDGET AND JUSTIFICATION) [ ] [ ] Realistic
Comments: ee
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 45 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
8. CONCLUSION: Do you recommend approval of this proposal
[ ] Yes as presented
[ ] Yes, subject to minor revisions shown under, “Comments”
[ ] No, see detailed comments under item 9
[ ] No, do not recommend it.
9. ANY OTHER COMMENTS
Comments: (Use a separate paper for detailed comments).
Note: You may use a separate sheet of paper for detailed comments on each of
the above sections.
APPENDIX V: STANDARD RESEARCH BUDGET FORMAT.
1. Cost Estimate
i. | Equipment, books, tools, costs (if any).
ii. | Payments to supporting staff.
iii. | Labour costs
iv. Consumables or materials
v. Travel and accommodation costs
vi. Communication
vii. Report writing costs
viii. | Honoraria; mention names of recipients, applicable rates and
duration
ix. Dissemination Costs
x. Contingencies, usually 10% should be allowed for
The cost estimates should conform to approval rates.
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 46 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
e Indicate which cadre of supporting staff, for how long and state the
basis of payment i.e. either a fixed rate per hour or lump-sum
payment(s).

e For consumables and materials, indicate the local/ foreign cost
component.

e Here state the applicable per diem or the estimated ticket cost,
duration of stay, accommodation charges per night, food cost
allowance, if travelling by road in a University or personal vehicle
indicate the total distance to be travelled and applicable rates allow
the driver’s expenses.

2. Budget Format and Payment Schedule (shown below)
UGANDA CHRISTIAN UNIVERSITY
SUMMARY OF RESEARCH PROJECT BUDGET
Date | Project | Name of Total | 10% 5% a 2"° Faculty
Title Researcher | Funds | Admin | Publish | Install | Install
Fee Fee
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 47 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
APPENDIX VI: RESEARCH CONTRACT FORMAT FOR RESEARCHERS

UGANDA CHRISTIAN UNIVERSITY

Research, Publications and Consultancy Centre

Contract for Research

1. Name of Researcher (s)

2. |, the Principal Researcher mentioned above, undertake to carry out the
reSearch Project, CNtitled.....cscecercecssecesssecsessececcsseesecsesstsscstssseessecessesesseseee cease
GE FIR aceomneemsmenccnaneans

3. The duration of doing the research Will Deé........... eee MONTHS

4. Uganda Christian University undertakes to provide funding for the proposal
project for the total amount of Uganda shillings... eens SUBjECt to
the availability of funds.

5. The payment will be in accordance with the approval schedule that is
attached to this contract.

6. All supporting staff, e.g., secretarial, technical and auxiliary, will be,
outsourced following the Uganda Christian University Contract guidelines and
paid from the awarded Research budget.

7. Uganda Christian University reserves the right to withhold payment partially or
fully, if it is not satisfied with the progress of the project.

8. The researcher(s) shall be required to refund the Uganda Christian University
payments received fully or in part in case of non-performance.

9. Uganda Christian University will have joint copyrights on the research.

Principal Researcher Witness

Dean, School of Research and Postgraduate Studies Date

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 48 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
APPENDIX VII: RESEARCH PROGRESS REPORT FORMAT
1.0 Project Description
Section A: Summary of Administrative Information
Project Number & Title
Principal Researcher
Name: Department
Period (month / year) covered by previous progress report:
From to
Starting date of project:
Estimate duration of project
Date of estimated completion
Initial:
Latest:
Estimated cost of project in (UGX)
Funds allocated to project in UGX
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 Phase 4 Total
2.0 Project Objectives
Briefly state the project objectives, indicate which (if any) are changed or new, and
give the reason for any revision (1) since the start of the project, and (2) since the
latest progress report.
3.0 Progress since last report
A. Scientific Progress
Include sufficiently detailed summaries of work carried out and results obtained to
permit an informed critical scientific assessment of the work by the respective
committees and peer-reviewers. If possible, results should be presented in tabular or
graphic form. Summaries should be complete in themselves and as brief as possible,
consistent with clarity (a maximum of two pages is required).
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 49 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
Section B: Progress towards Achieving Project Objectives
Describe advances or problems encountered towards the completion of the plan of
work for this reporting period. Interpret new findings (both positive and negative) in
terms of the objectives of the project and state if they are expected to increase (or
decrease) the duration, total cost, or additional lines of research. Indicate such with
sufficient explanatory information to ensure understanding by reviewers.
4.0 Financial Statement of Income and Expenditure during the period covered
by the Report.
<<<
Amount! Fund? Funds} Balance’
brought Received expended
forward
a
Zs Travel and
orem
i A
a [Reverate
Lc a
1. Amount should be shown in Uganda Shillings (UGX).
2. The breakdown should be as shown in the budget approved for the
reporting period.
33 Include as funds expended those for which commitments have
been made.
4. This amount is the sum of amounts in the first two columns, less
the amount in the third. The balance should be reconciled with
the approved budget.
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 50 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
APPENDIX VIII: FORMAT FOR THE FINAL RESEARCH REPORT
1.0 Research Report Content
A research report should include the following headings:

e Abstract

e Acknowledgements

e Table of contents

e List of figures

e List of symbols

e Introduction

e Objectives

e Literature review

e Methodology

e Experimental details

e Results

e Analysis and discussion of the results

e Conclusions and recommendations

e References or Bibliography

e Tables

e Appendices

2.0 Report Format

e All headings should be left justified.

e Line spacing should be 1.5 and fonts should be 12cpi.

e Left margin should be 1.5in and 1in on all other sides.

e Typing should be on one side of the A4 page.

e Format for quoting reference numbers in the text and reference should be
standard. APA format is recommended. Any other standard that is
recommended for certain professions could also be used.

e Report cover shall be as shown as in the attached format

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 51 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
APPENDIX IX: SCHOOL OF RESEARCH AND POSTGRADUATE STUDIES
ORGANOGRAM
The Research, Publications and Consultancy Centre will achieve its goals and
objectives through activities that will launch each individual function. It is therefore
important to structure the Centre and designate key functions to persons who are
able to catch the vision.
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 52 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
Appendix X - Guidelines for Accounting for Externally Funded Research

1. Independent grants accounts officer be appointed to handle
accounting matters related to grants, such as copies of contract,
budgets, feedback on expenditure and surrenders.

2. Uganda Christian University charges 10% administrative fees for
university overheads.

3. The procurement of major items (above UGX 300,000) has to follow
procurement procedures of the university.

Items below the limit should be procured by lead researcher and
proper documentation kept. Such documents are pre-printed
letterhead, rubber stamped receipts where possible.

4. “Per diem” payments are graduated depending on rank of officers;
however, whatever the grant writer negotiated with the funder is
upheld regardless of prevailing university rates. This amount is not
subject to taxation. The researcher is surcharged if he or she exceeds
the amounts in the budget.

Meals and airtime for the research personnel should be reported but
on a non-accountable basis given the leeway provided by the donor.
Transport funds can be expended through mileage claim when
university vehicles are used. Use of personal cars is permitted where
expenses are charged to the transport budget. Similar charges are
made for use of other transportation means e.g. taxis, bodabodas,
buses and aircrafts.

5. The cash advancing mechanism for projects is administered through a

' project petty cash float system. Each project be authorized to have a
petty cash float whose amount could be determined on the basis of
its estimated cash requirements. The float would be replenished on
submission of accounting documentation to support amounts utilized
for the previous period.

Partial accounting be allowed of the petty cash float e.g. when the
float has been utilized up to a pre-set level. This procedure would

help avoid a situation where project runs short of necessary funds as
the staff wait for full accounting of the float or delays in release of
funds once a request for reimbursement has been lodged with finance
department.

6. A vote book is opened by the grants officer/grants coordinator for
every funded project. Updated records are kept indicating amounts
requisitioned for, date, by whom etc.

, Separate statements should be kept differentiating normal per diem
requisitions (in the course University duties) and _ project
requisitions.

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 53 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
7. The principal investigators can and are expected to inspect this record
regularly. Advance forms (not imprest forms) are filled in triplicate. A
detailed breakdown of the activities to be carried out are out lined.
The project petty cash floats should also be subjected to periodic
surprise independent audits in order to avoid situations where
University funds are diverted for personal use without detection of
management.

8. Monies released from the individual votes are accounted for 60 days
after conclusion of scheduled activities.

Items in the surrender should conform to the budgeted activities and
expected outcome by funder.

The funds accounted for by the PI or researcher should not be
channelled to / through the Employee’s account nor should the
payments thereof.

9. Honoraria paid to the Uganda Christian University researchers and
consultancy staff are subject to taxation through the pay roll. The
rates of payment are graduated depending on rank and role in the
research projects.

Proposal writing and other research related activities are assumed to
be done while the officer is performing their other assigned duties.
Non Uganda Christian University staff should report their income and
taxes to URA.

10.Each grant is treated differently (depending on terms by funding
agent) but treatment is within the broad grants guidelines. There
should be no deviation from the grant budget, unless through writing
from both parties that is lead researcher and funder.

A letter or certificate of completion of grant should be issued by the
grants officer upon completion of project.
Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 54 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
Appendix XI-Guidelines for Accounting for Internally* Funded Research

1. Independent accounts officer be appointed to handle accounting matters related
to internally funded research, such as copies of contract, budgets, feedback on
expenditure and surrenders.

2. The procurement of major items (above UGS 300,000) has to follow procurement
procedures of the university.

Items below the limit should be procured by lead researcher and proper
documentation of official receipts kept. Such documents may include pre-printed
letterhead, rubber stamped receipts.

3. “Per diem” payments are graduated depending on rank of officers according to
existing University policy; This amount is not subject to taxation. The researcher
is surcharged if he or she exceeds the amounts in the budget.

Airtime should be accounted for by way of receipts and should be within the
budget.

Transport funds can be expended through mileage claim when university vehicles
are used. Use of personal cars is permitted where expenses are charged to the
transport budget. Similar charges are made for use of other transportation means
e.g. taxis, bodabodas, buses and aircrafts.

4. A float of UGX. 1,500,000 will be maintained by the Director SRPGS to cover
incidentals related to research projects.

The project petty cash floats should also be subjected to periodic surprise
independent audits in order to avoid situations where University funds are
diverted for personal use without detection of management.

5. A vote book is opened by the accounts officer for every funded project. Updated
records are kept indicating amounts requisitioned for, date, by whom etc.
Separate statements should be kept differentiating normal per diem requisitions
(in the course University duties) and research project requisitions.

6. The Lead Researcher can and is expected to inspect this record regularly.
Advance forms (not imprest forms) are filled in triplicate. A detailed breakdown of
the activities to be carried out is out lined.

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 55 of 56
Document Title: 2020 POLICY ON RESEARCH
7. Monies released from the individual votes are accounted for within 60 days and not
later than 30 days after conclusion of scheduled activities.

Items in the surrender should conform to the budgeted activities and expected
outcome according to objectives of the proposal approved by the Research
Management Committee.

8. Payments to researchers and facilitators shall be done through Finance Department
and subject to tax as per tax regulations. The non-Uganda Christian University staff
whose payments are below the tax bracket shall be paid directly by the researcher.
Finance Department shall advice SRPGS of the prevailing tax rates on yearly basis.

9. Each proposal is treated differently (depending on the specifications of each
proposal) but treatment is within the broad guidelines as provided for by the SRPGS.
There should be no deviation from the budget, unless through writing from both
parties that is lead researcher and Dean, SRPGS.

Statement of accounts will be provided to the Dean, SRPGS on monthly basis. Further,
a letter of completion of the research project should be issued to the researcher by
the Dean, SRPGS.

* Internally funded research refers to research funded by Uganda Christian
University as opposed to research that is funded by institutions/organizations other
than Uganda Christian University

Research Policy 24" July 2020 Page 56 of 56