Document Title: post grad regulations
POSTGRADUATE 
 
ACADEMIC REGULATIONS
Document Title: post grad regulations
CONTENTS .......................................................... .....Page                                                              
 
1. INTRODUCTION………………. .......................... ……………. ……………. 5 
 1.1 Comparison of Types of Programme .....................  ……………. 5 
  1.1.1 Regular, Full Time ..................................  …………….   5 
  1.1.2 Modular Programmes ...............................  ……………. 5 
  1.1.3 Distance Format ....................................  …………….   6 
  1.1.4 Degree by Research ................................  ……………. 6 
 
 1.2 Comparison of Estimated Duration  ... of Programmes  …………….   6 
 
2.  ADMISSIONS .....................................................  ……………. 7 
 2.1 General Admission Requirements ........................  ……………. 7 
 2.2 Minimum Entry Requirements ............................  ……………. 7 
  2.2.1 Postgraduate Diploma Programmes ..............  ……………. 7 
  2.2.2 Master’s Degree Programmes .....................  ……………. 7 
  2.2.3 Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) ........................  ……………. 7 
 2.3 English Language Competency ...........................  ……………. 8 
 2.4 Special requirements for Research-based  
   Programmes ................................................  ……………. 8 
 
3.  APPLICATION ....................................................  ……………. 8 
 3.1 Obtaining applications .....................................  ……………. 8 
  3.1.1 Ugandan Applicants. ...............................  ……………. 8 
  3.1.2 Non Ugandan Applicants ...........................  ……………. 9 
 3.2 When to Apply ..............................................  ……………. 9 
  3.2.1 For Postgraduate Diploma & Master Degree  
  Programmes ................................................  ……………. 9 
  3.2.2 For Doctor of Philosophy Degree Programmes ……………. 9 
 3.3 How to Apply ................................................  ……………. 10 
  3.3.1 Traditional Programmes ...........................  ……………. 10 
 3.4 Review Process .............................................  ……………. 10 
 3.5 Confirmation of Vacancies ................................  ……………. 11 
 3.6 Correspondence ............................................  ……………. 11 
4.  REGISTRATION ..................................................  ……………. 12   
 4.1  Registration Policy for regular, full time programmes ……………. 12     
  4.1.1 Reporting Day .......................................  ……………. 12 
  4.1.2 Prompt Day ..........................................  ……………. 12    
  4.1.3 Registration Deadline Day .........................  ……………. 13 
  4.1.4 Mid-Term Deadline Day ............................  ……………. 13 
  4.1.5 Withdrawal Day .....................................  ……………. 13 
 4.2  Registration for Non-Full Time programmes ...........  ……………. 13 
  4.2.1 Reporting Day .......................................  ……………. 14
Document Title: post grad regulations
4.2.2 Registration Deadline Day .........................  ……………. 14 
 4.3  General Information on registration ....................  ……………. 14 
  4.3.1 Final examinations .................................  ……………. 14 
  4.3.2 Refunds ..............................................  ……………. 14 
  4.3.3 Residence Hall Policy ..............................  ……………. 14 
  4.3.4 Banking ..............................................  ……………. 15 
  4.3.5 Scholarship Credit ..................................  ……………. 15 
  4.3.6 Use of University facilities ........................  ……………. 15 
 
5.  GENERAL STUDY REQUIREMENTS  ...........................  ……………. 15 
 5.1  Course Load in a regular, full time program ..........  ……………. 15 
 5.2  Auditing of Courses ........................................  ……………. 16 
 5.3  Adding or Dropping of Courses ...........................  ……………. 16 
 5.4  Student Assessment .......................................  ……………. 16 
 5.5  Class Attendance Policy  .................................  ……………. 17 
 5.6  Mentoring Partnerships for Students  ...................  ……………. 17 
 5.7  Internships and Practical Experience ...................  ……………. 17 
 5.8  Certificate of Due Performance .........................  ……………. 18 
 
6.  PROMOTION, FAILURE AND DISCONTINUATION . ……………. 18 
 6.1  Grading System ............................................  ……………. 18 
 6.2  Progress .....................................................  ……………. 19 
  6.2.1 Normal Progress ....................................  ……………. 19 
  6.2.2 Probation Progress .................................  ……………. 19 
  6.2.3 Problem cases  ......................................  ……………. 19 
 6.3  Promotion ..................................................  ……………. 19 
 6.4  Discontinuation ............................................  ……………. 20 
 6.5  Retakes .....................................................  ……………. 20 
 6.6  Repetition ..................................................  ……………. 21 
 6.7  Students Who Fail To Graduate .........................  ……………. 21 
7.  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-FULL TIME PROGRAMMES ……… 21 
 7.1  Modular programmes ......................................  ……………. 21 
  7.1.1 Description of course cycles ......................  ……………. 21 
  7.1.2 Module assessment  ................................  ……………. 22 
  7.1.3 Summary of Assessment Scheme .................  ……………. 23 
 7.2  Distance programmes .....................................  ……………. 23 
  7.2.1 Study Format ........................................  ……………. 23 
  7.2.2 Evaluation ...........................................  ……………. 24 
  7.2.3 Instruction and Supervision .......................  ……………. 24 
 7.3  Research-Based Programmes ............................  ……………. 25 
  7.3.1 M Phil /Doctoral Candidature .....................  ……………. 25 
  7.3.2 Maximum Periods of Candidature 
  (or Time Limit) .............................................  ……………. 26 
 
8.  EXAMINATION REGULATIONS .................................  ……………. 26 
 8.1  Students’ Registration for the Examination ...........  ……………. 26 
 8.2  Conduct of Examinations  ................................  ……………. 27   
 8.3  Aegrotat  ....................................................  ……………. 30 
 8.4  Re-marking of Examinations .............................  ……………. 32
Document Title: post grad regulations
9.  RESEARCH COMPONENT .......................................  ……………. 32 
 9.1  Progress Reports ...........................................  ……………. 32 
  9.1.1 Tradional and Distance Programmes ............  ……………. 32 
  9.1.2 Progress Report for Research -based programmes…………….   33 
 9.2  Extension of Registration  ................................  ……………. 33 
 9.3  Dissertation or Thesis .....................................  ……………. 34 
 9.4  Special requirements for Research-based degrees……………. 34 
  9.4.1 Change of Research Direction ....................  ……………. 35 
  9.4.2 Supervision ..........................................  ……………. 35 
 
10. EXAMINATION OF POST GRADUATE STUDENTS ……………. 35 
 10.1 Viva Voce Examination ...................................  ……………. 36 
 
11.  AWARD OF DEGREES .....................................  ……………. 37 
 
12.  GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS ..........................  ……………. 38
Document Title: post grad regulations
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Uganda Christian University offers a number of postgraduate degre es and diploma programs which are 
designed to develop a cadre of professionals with integrity, power of critical enquiry, logical thought and 
independent judgment with a Christian perspective.  The programs are offered in four delivery modes: 
regular, modular, research, online, distance and E-Learning.  
 
 1.1 COMPARISON OF TYPES OF PROGRAMME 
 
1.1.1 Regular, Online, Distance and E-Learning Full Time  
 
A typical full time post -graduate programme shall include four full time courses per semester for 2 -3 
semesters plus research or project paper requirement leading to two full years of study for a master’s 
degree (and 12 to 15 months for a postgraduate diploma).  The maximum duration of Full time programs is 
four (4) years. Details are included below. 
 
1.1.2 Modular Programmes 
 
Modular programs are designed to meet the needs of practitioners who will typically study part -time or 
similar modes such as online distance and E -Learning. There is therefore flexibility in the study plans and 
the taught modules are design ed with as few dependencies as possible. As far as possible, each module is 
stand-alone and available for study as and when the student is ready to undertake it. Students are allowed 
to study modules at any rate compatible with their personal requirements,  subject to the following 
constraint that there will be a maximum of f ive (5) years duration from studying the first module to be 
counted towards the award of a degree, diploma or certificate, to completion.  
  
During modules, students may engage in small and large group sessions with an emphasis on problem -based 
learning and group activity, participate in field visits, and engage in mentorship, and carry out w ritten 
assignments and presentations.   
In between modules, students will be assigned supplementar y readings and develop projects.  A research 
project shall be undertaken.  
 
1.1.3 Online Distance and E-Learning (ODeL) Format 
 
The term “ ODeL” is used here to describe academic programs offered to students through printed 
instructional materials, audio -visual materials, and computer technologies where most of the interaction 
between students and faculty is by e-mail, postal mail, telephone, and occasional video conference. Limited 
face-to-face interaction may also be required.
Document Title: post grad regulations
1.1.4 Degree by Research 
 
The Masters, M Phil and PhD by research degrees will utilize existing capacity of highly trained members of 
Academic Staff. The degrees will also provide a cost effective program for staff development and should 
lead to publications that will promote UC U as a centre of excellence in research. This training track will 
target candidates who have very good first degrees (second class and above) and / or have already attained 
a Masters degree either by coursework and dissertation or by coursework and project  paper who wish to 
pursue advanced studies and research leading to M Phil or PhD. 
 
 1.2  COMPARISON OF ESTIMATED DURATION OF PROGRAMMES  
 
i. Postgraduate Diploma (modular/normal/regular/full time) – two semesters, up to four modules 
ii. Masters degrees (normal / regular/full time)– four semesters  
iii. Masters degrees (part time) –six to eight semesters   
iv. Masters degree (Modular) - four to ten modules over two or three years 
v. Masters degree (ODeL) - four to six modules over  three or four years 
vi.   Masters degree (Research) – two to four semesters over two years 
vii. PhD (Provisional Admission) –at most one calendar year 
viii. PhD/MD/LLD (normal/regular/full time)–up to five  calendar years  
ix.   PhD/MD/LLD (ODeL) –up to seven calendar years 
x.   PhD by Research Only – Up to 4 years 
 
 
 2. ADMISSIONS 
 
 2.1 GENERAL ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS 
 
Admission to regular postgraduate studies at Uganda Christian University is into Postgraduate Diploma, 
Masters Degree, or Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) programs. 
 
 2.2 MINIMUM ENTRY REQUIREMENTS 
 
2.2.1 Postgraduate Diploma Programmes 
 
A Bachelor’s degree (second class and above) or its equivalent from a recognised University in a program 
relevant to the program applied for.  
 
2.2.2 Master’s Degree Programmes 
 
A Bachelor’s degree (second class and above) or its equivalent from a recognized University. Applicants with 
lower qualifications must satisfy the Senate that they have acquired academic growth by evidence of 
research and publications. In some programs, a qualifying course followed by an examination may be given.
Document Title: post grad regulations
2.2.3 Doctoral Degrees 
2.2.3.1 Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) or Research Doctorate 
 
A Master’s degree from a recognized University in a field relevant to the programme. First -class degree 
graduates who wish to  register for PhD would normally register for a Master’s degree first and after a year 
or two of satisfactory progress may apply for upgrading of their candidature to PhD level.  
 
2.2.3.2 Professional Doctorate Degrees 
A Professional Master’s degree from a  recognized University. First -class degree graduates who wish to 
register for a professional Doctorate  would normally register for a professional Master’s degree first and 
after a year or two of satisfactory progress may apply for upgrading of their candid ature to the professional 
Master’s level.  
 
Such doctorates are awarded in fields where scholarly research is closely aligned with a particular profession 
or industry. They promote close cooperation between the institution, industry and profession and provide a 
framework for the integration of professional expertise and scholarly inquiry. Professional doctorates shall 
normally have an advanced coursework component designed to expose candidates to leading and challenging 
ideas in their profession. 
 
2.3  ENGLISH LANGUAGE COMPETENCY 
Applicants for a research higher degree may at discretion of the Postgraduate Admissions Board be required 
to demonstrate satisfactory performance in an approved test of English before being admitted to the 
University. 
 
 2.4  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR RESEARCH-BASED 
  PROGRAMMES 
The offer of admission to M Phil / PhD will depend on the ability of the faculty / department to provide the 
facilities and supervision required to support the proposed research. 
A second class and above honors first degree in relevant area is required for admission to the M Phil and for 
a PhD a relevant Masters degree.  
 
Applicants must demonstrate ability for independent study and to do research. Applicants may be required 
to participate in a  face-face or online interview. 
 
Faculties may have additional requirements such as language proficiency. 
 
 3. APPLICATION 
 
3.1 OBTAINING APPLICATIONS 
 
Application is made through filling an application form obtained at a non -refundable application 
fee from the Deputy Vic e-Chancellor for Academic Affairs’ office or Bishop Barham University 
College, Kabale and the Study Centres of Mbale and Arua and from the Diocesan Education offices
Document Title: post grad regulations
of the Diocese of Busoga, Soroti and South Rwenzori. You may also apply online from the un iversity 
website at www.ucu.ac.ug and payment for the form made on submission. 
 
Application forms are property of Uganda Christian University. Under no circumstances will they be 
returned or forwarded to other institutions of learning. 
 
The application form must be fully filled and the relevant academic documents attached. 
 
The application form must be submitted to the admissions office of the university according to the 
set published deadline dates.    
 
Uganda Christian University,  
P.O Box 4, Mukono, Uganda.  
Tel: 0312-350880 or 0312 350 800 
Email: registrar@ucu.ac.ug or download from the website, www.ucu.ac.ug.  
 
 3.2  WHEN TO APPLY 
 
 3.2.1 For Postgraduate Diploma & Master Degree Programmes. 
 
Applications are received all year round according to the set deadline dates. 
 
3.2.2 For Doctor of Philosophy Degree Programmes 
 
Applications are made and received all year round according to set deadlines dates. Applicants must first 
present a synopsis of 3-5 pages in length to the School for Research and Postgraduate Studies for vetting and 
approval before they can qualify for provisional admission of up to one year. Only qualifying candidates 
would be admitted. 
 
 3.3 HOW TO APPLY 
  
 3.3.1 TRADITIONAL PROGRAMMES 
 
All completed application forms must be accompanied by relevant copies of certificates and certified copies 
of academic transcripts and reference letters. Application forms which are not completed properly may 
cause delays in the processing of applications. 
 
In addition to the application form, include:  
i. A Curriculum Vitae with email and telephone contact information 
ii. Two character references with contact information 
iii. Faculties may require candidates to supply additional requirements such as; 
 - A personal testimony of religious life and growth 
 - A description of relevant professional/leadership experiences 
 - An outline of life goals and how they plan to achieve them 
 - The reasons for choosing this particular career path
Document Title: post grad regulations
- Knowledge of use of computers and the Internet 
 - Personal strengths and weakness 
 - Applicants may be expected to attend oral Interviews at  a date to be communicated. Originals of 
Academic Qualification papers are  expected during interviews, including Marriage Certificates, where 
applicable. 
 
3.4 REVIEW PROCESS 
Individual applicant’s file is reviewed for completeness: 
 
i. Short listed appl icants are forwarded to the University Admissions Board. Ea ch program is given 
 appropriate weight to the factors pertinent to its nature.  The University Admis sions board grants or 
denies admission and forwards the decision to the Deputy Vice-Chancellor Academic Affairs office. 
ii. Shortlisted applicants maybe invited for interview. 
iii. Shortlisted applicants may be given an entry level test. 
 
Applicants shall check for the results of their ap plications from the admissions office according to set 
deadlines. These processes my be conducted face to face or online.  
   
 
 
 
 3.5 CONFIRMATION OF VACANCIES 
 
 
The selection for admission is provisional. It is subject to confirmation with payment of a no n-
refundable tuition fee deposited to the University Bank Account or paid at the University Cash 
Office and presenting a copy of the receipt with the confirmation slip to the academic office, by 
the set deadlines. The receipt may also be submitted online.   
 
 
Vacancies for selected applicants including confirmed ones are not ordinarily reserved beyond the 
registration period. However, a deferral for a period of two years may be accepted.  
 
 3.6 CORRESPONDENCE 
All correspondence pertaining to admission should be sent to: 
 
Admissions Office 
Uganda Christian University, 
P.O.BOX 4 Mukono, Uganda 
Tel (Off):  +256-31-2350880 
         +256-31-2350800 
Email:  admissions@ucu.ac.ug
Document Title: post grad regulations
4. REGISTRATION 
 
Students of Uganda Christian University are expected to register dur ing the first two weeks of class 
in accordance with the registration policy. There are important dates that guide the registration 
and students should note them carefully. These dates are spelled out in the University Calendar of 
Events. Registration can be done online or in the Academic Office.   
After this, postgraduate students may be required to register with their respective Faculty \School\ Institute 
and Department. 
 
 4.1 REGISTRATION POLICY FOR REGULAR, FULL TIME PROGRAMMES 
 
There are important dates that guide the registration and students should note them carefully. These dates 
are spelled out in the University Calendar of Events and the student’s joining instructions. 
 
4.1.1 Reporting Day 
 
Reporting day is the Day when the University opens its resid ence and dining halls to the students 
and it is when the students are expected to report and register either physically or online. 
 
4.1.2 PROMPT DAY 
 
Prompt Day is the last day when the student pays all the fees (Prompt payment) or pays Half 
Tuition and half of other fees (Half Prompt payment) and registers. 
 
PROMPT PAYMENT: Prompt payment is the payment of all Tuition and other fees. Prompt payment  
EXEMPTS the student from payment of the Registration fee. 
 
HALF PROMPT PAYMENT: Half Prompt Payment is the pa yment of Half Tuition and Half of other  
fees including boarding fees. Half Prompt Payment EXEMPTS the student from payment of half of 
the Registration fee. 
 
4.1.3 Registration Deadline Day: 
 
Registration deadline day is the last day when students must have  paid at least 45% of all fees dues 
and registered fully for the semester. Failure to register will automatically make the student 
forfeit his or her place. NO EXCEPTIONS WILL BE ALLOWED. After the first two weeks, no student 
may register and non -registered students will not be allowed to access classes or other University 
facilities including eLearning services.
Document Title: post grad regulations
4.1.4 Mid-Term Deadline Day 
 
Mid-Term Deadline Day is the day when 75% of fees owed to the University for the Semester at 
hand must be paid.  
 
4.1.5 Full Fees Deadline Day 
 
Full Fees Deadline Day is the last day when all fees owed to the University for the Semester at hand 
must be paid. All registered students must pay the balance of semester fees, by this deadline. 
After this deadline passes, students shall be allowed two further weeks to make complete payment 
including a late penalty. After the twelfth week, any student who fails to pay full fees for the 
semester shall be de-registered. 
 
4.1.6 Withdrawal Day 
 
Withdrawal Day is the last day when th e student may withdraw from the University with permission from 
Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic Affairs). Students who officially withdraw at the DVC (AA)’s Office during 
the first seven weeks will be charged on a pro rata weekly basis.  If they have a ne gative balance on their 
account, they will be debited and required to pay the balance before registering for another semester.  If 
they have a positive balance, they will be credited for the balance. 
 
 4.2 REGISTRATION FOR NON-FULL TIME PROGRAMMES 
 
Students must register in the first week of every module. This registration can be done online or in the 
Registration Office.  
 
4.2.1 Reporting Day 
 
Reporting day is the Day when the University opens its residence and dining halls to the students 
and it is when the students are expected to report and register either physically or online. 
 
 
4.2.2 Registration Deadline Day 
 
Registration deadline day is the day when students must have paid all fees for the current module and 
registered fully for the module.  Failure to register will automatically make the student forfeit his or her 
place. NO EXCEPTIONS WILL BE ALLOWED.
Document Title: post grad regulations
4.3 GENERAL INFORMATION ON REGISTRATION 
 
4.3.1 Registering for more than one Programme 
 
Students shall not register to study at Uganda Christia n University for more than one programme during the 
same period of study.  If found, a student will be de -registered from his/her studies at Uganda Christian 
University. 
 
4.3.2 Final examinations 
 
Registered students shall be qualified to sit examinations,  so long as they have fulfilled the prior academic 
requirements of the particular course. 
 
4.3.3 Refunds 
 
Any monies deposited into University accounts, whether before or after the deadline, will not be refunded 
and will be considered payments toward stude nt debt balances or credits toward future fees, unless the 
student is clearing his or her final account at Graduation, or leaving the University for good. Exceptional 
cases shall be handled by the Directorate of Finance and Office of the Deputy Vice Chance llor for Academic 
Affairs. 
 
4.3.4 Residence Hall Policy 
 
Theology students who are ordained or seeking ordination will be expected to be resident in the University 
Halls of Residence for their entire course of study, other postgraduate students shall apply to the Director of 
Students’ Affairs to be accommodated in the university halls of residence if they so wish. 
 
4.3.5 Banking 
 
Students will pay all monies into local bank accounts. Students may bank ahead of registration. The 
university Director of Finance will receive bank slips in advance of the Prompt Day.  
If the student fails to register, these monies will be returned in full when claimed, before the opening of the 
semester or on a pro -rata weekly basis when claimed after the first day of the opening of the 
semester/module.  For funds remittance, refer to Admission Booklets 
 
 
 
4.3.6 Scholarship Credit 
 
At registration, students must list all scholarships (bursaries) received or expected. Official scholarships – 
including official support from a diocese  – will qualify students for prompt payment discounts even if the 
scholarships arrive after the prompt day.
Document Title: post grad regulations
4.3.7 Use of University facilities 
 
It is an academic offence for non -registered students to use University services, including, attendance of 
lectures, use of the library, dining facilities, and sitting examinations.  
Students are responsible for seeing that they complete their registration process for each 
semester/modular. No credit hours for the semester will be given to students who fail to do so. 
 
5. GENERAL STUDY REQUIREMENTS  
5.1 COURSE LOAD IN ALL CATEGORIES OF FULL-TIME  PROGRAMS 
 
The course load for a full -time graduate is four  (4) courses or 16 to 18 Credit Units per semester /module 
(refer to section 1.2) . Typically this teaching load wou ld last 2 or 3 semesters (8 -12 courses in total) 
followed by either: 
i. A research project paper OR 
ii. A full research and dissertation  
 
 
 
5.2 AUDITING OF COURSES 
 
A student may, in addition to his or her normal course load, register to audit (non -credit) courses up to a 
maximum of four hours per week. Permission to audit courses should be sought from the Head of 
Department and will be subject to approval by the relevant Dean(s) of Faculty. 
 
 5.3 ADDING OR DROPPING OF COURSES 
 
Full-time, part-time, modular or ODeL  registered students of Uganda Christian University may, in addition 
to their normal load, add retake courses as long as they do not exceed 20 credit units per semester /module 
or drop any courses as long as the credit units are not less than 16 p er semester/module. The last day to 
add or drop a course is the last Friday of the second week of a semester /module. Permission to add or drop 
courses should be sought from the relevant Head of Department and will be subject to approval by the 
Dean(s) of Faculty. 
 
 5.4 STUDENT ASSESSMENT 
  
Evaluation of a student’s academic performance shall be based on continuous assessment and examinations. 
 
Head of Department shall supervise continuous assessment and a student shall be required to submit work 
for continu ous assessment by the due date. Continuous assessment, which shall consist of “two or more 
Assessments” per semester, shall ordinarily contribute 60% of the marks in each University Examination.   
 
Mid-semester feedback to students is necessary to help stu dents and lecturers identify and improve where 
there are gaps.
Document Title: post grad regulations
The examinations shall ordinarily contribute 50% of the marks in each course or as stipulated in the 
programme curriculum. 
 
Exams should emphasize analysis rather than repeating memorized information.  
 
 
In addition to the continuous assessment, a final examination is administered at the end of each semester.  
Exams may be administered in a variety of ways that may include but are not limited to the 
following: face to face, oral,  online, take home, practical projects etc.   Examinations are formal 
and externally moderated, with final approval by the University Senate. 
The examinations shall ordinarily contribute 40% of the marks in each course or as stipulated in the program 
curriculum. 
 
 
 
5.5 CLASS ATTENDANCE POLICY  
 
i. Students should leave the Lecture Room/space if after 15 minutes the Lecturer has not 
shown up. The Head of Department/Faculty Dean should be immediately notified by the 
Class/Guild representative that the lecture has not taken place. 
 
ii. A student who reports fifteen minutes late for the Lecture shall not be allowed into the 
Lecture. 
 
iii. A Lecturer may cancel the lecture if after 15 minutes less than 25% of the class is present. 
 
iv. All mobile phones must be switched off during face to face lectures. A student who leaves a 
face to face lecture to answer a phone call shall not be permitted to return to the Lecture. 
 
v. A student shall be  expected to attend all class sessions. A student who misses more tha n 25% of class 
sessions shall not be allowed to sit for examination(s). 
 
 5.6 MENTORING PARTNERSHIPS FOR STUDENTS  
 
Mentoring and mutual/peer critique provide enhanced learning for students.   
Options: (a) mentors are assigned to all students, (b) mentors are assigned for targeted subject areas, and 
(c) mentors are assigned to a targeted group of students (e.g., eager learn ers, or those who have 
challenges).
Document Title: post grad regulations
5.7 INTERNSHIPS AND PRACTICAL EXPERIENCE 
 
i. Experiential learning is fundamental to the education process. 
ii. Realistic objectives and meaningful processes for both supervision and reflection on the experience are 
required for practical experience to be useful. 
iii. Practicals shall be measured in credit units. 
 
 5.8 CERTIFICATE OF DUE PERFORMANCE 
 
Faculty Deans and Heads of department will recommend to DVC Academic Affairs students who do 
not merit Certificate of Due Performance by Friday of the twelfth week of the Semester. This 
applies to all programmes including those conducted online.    
i. Students denied Certificate of due Perform ance shall not sit University Examination and will 
be notified and a report made to Senate by the DVC Academic Affairs. 
 
ii. A student who scores below 42% in overall coursework assessment shall be denied the 
Certificate of Due Performance (see passing a Cours e below). This means that that student will not 
be allowed to take examinations. 
 
6. PROMOTION, FAILURE AND DISCONTINUATION 
 
 6.1 GRADING SYSTEM 
 
Each course for masters and postgraduate diploma programs  is graded out of a maximum of 100 marks and 
assigned appropriate grades and grade points as follows: 
 
 
GRADING SYSTEM FOR POSTGRADUATE CERTIFICATES AND POSTGRADUATE DIPLOMAS 
Score Grade Grade Point Explanation 
80  - 100 A 5.0 Excellent 
75  -   79 B+ 4.5 Very Good 
70  -   74 B 4.0 Good 
65  -   69 B- 3.5 Fair
Document Title: post grad regulations
60  -   64 C 3.0 Pass 
55   -   59 D 2.5 Compensatory Pass 
    0   -     54 F 0 Fail 
 
 
 
 
GRADING SYSTEM FOR MASTERS DEGREES 
Score Grade Grade Point Grade Point Ave Explanation 
80  - 100 A 5.0 5.0 Excellent 
75  -   79 B+ 4.5 4.40 – 4.49 Very Good 
70  -   74 B 4.0 3.60 – 4.39 Good 
65  -   69 B- 3.5 2.80 – 3.59 Fair 
60  -   64 C 3.0 2.00 – 2.79 Satisfactory 
0   -   59 F 2.5 0 Failure 
 
GRADING SYSTEM FOR PhD and DOCTORAL DEGREES 
Score Grade Grade Point Grade Point Ave Explanation 
80  - 100 A 5.0 5.0 Excellent 
75  -   79 B+ 4.5 4.40 – 5.0 Very good
Document Title: post grad regulations
70  -   74 B 4.0 3.60 – 4.39 Pass 
0   -   69 F 2.5 2.00 – 2.79 Failure 
For Doctorates and PhD programs, the passmark is 70% as shown above. 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 PROGRESS 
 
 6.2.1 Normal Progress 
 
This occurs when a student passes all courses taken.  A student shall pass a course if he/she scores at least  
42% in Coursework Assessment and at least 28% in the final examination.  The pass mark in each course  for 
postgraduate masters and postgraduate diplomas shall be 60%. 
 
 6.2.2 Probation Progress 
 
This is a warning stage and occurs if: 
i. A student fails a core/compulsory course, OR 
 
ii. A student obtains a grade point average (GPA) or cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) of less than 
2.0 for masters and postgraduate diploma programs ONLY. 
 
A student is removed from probation when neither of the two conditions (i) or (ii) no longer holds. 
 
6.2.3 Problem cases  
 
Students designated as “problem cases” are required to retake all courses in a semester or module if: 
i. They have failed to attain a minimum of 2.0 GPA in that semester or module OR 
 
6.3 PROMOTION 
 
Problem case students shall not be allowed to proceed to the next semester/module. 
 
 6.4 DISCONTINUATION 
 
A student shall normally be required to discontinue his or her studies if: 
 
i. He or she fails the University examination(s) after the third attempt (a failed course can only be retaken 
twice).
Document Title: post grad regulations
ii. He or she keeps on probation for more than two semesters/modules. 
 
iii. He/she exceeds the maximum duration of the program 
 
 
6.5 RETAKES 
 
A candidate who, having failed a course shall be permitted to retake examination in the failed course when 
the courses are offered and examined, provided there is reason to expect that they can improve.  
 
There is no supplementary e xamination in any course of postgraduate programs. The candidates will retake 
the entire course and re-write the course work and exam.  
  
Students who retake courses outside their regular schedules shall pay for the courses they retake. 
 
A student who fail s not more than 2 non -core courses shall graduate provided th at the student scores at 
least 60% in the failed courses. 
 
To pass a retake examination, a candidate must obtain at least 60% or 3.0 grade point of the marks in each 
subject. Retake courses will be assessed out of 100% and shall be reflected on their Academic Transcript. 
 
 6.6 REPETITION 
 
A candidate who is not a repeater may be permitted to repeat the studies for a semester /module only if 
there are special social and/or medical circumstances subm itted to the dean of the faculty, normally prior 
to the meeting of the board of examiners, so as to convince the faculty board that the candidate is likely to 
do well if this concession is granted. 
 
 6.7 STUDENTS WHO FAIL TO GRADUATE 
 
Graduate students are required to pay full tuition and all other fees from the time of the first registration to 
the expected year of completion of the course (normal duration of program).  For the two years beyond the 
expected year of completion  (maximum duration), every student shall be required to pay 32% of fees per 
module/semester until the maximum duration of the program. 
 
NB: Pro-rata rates shall not apply. 
 
 7.  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-FULL  TIME PROGRAMMES 
 
 7.1  MODULAR/ ODeL PROGRAMMES 
 
 7.1.1 Description of course cycles
Document Title: post grad regulations
Modular studies comprise intensive study activities organized as cycles:  
 
PRE-COURSE WORK: a program of independent study through which the student will prepare for the 
intensive period. This will include activities such as background reading, research and practical exercises. It 
is intended that this will be a substantial element of the module and is compulsory. The specification of pre-
course study is issued at least four weeks before the intensive period. 
 
INTENSIVE PERIOD: This takes the form of an intensive program of formal lectures (conducted online or face 
to face) , laboratory sessions, design workshops, practical exercises, and evaluative summaries which 
introduce ideas, and encourage their development of critical analysis.   
 
INDEPENDENT STUDY: The student is expected to carry out independent research and background reading to 
support all parts of their module . Lecturers will give advice on books and other resources that may be 
suitable.  
 
POST-COURSE WORK: The follow -up stage is intend ed to allow the student to apply, as far as possible, the 
knowledge gained through the preceding stages, to some realistic problem. This will normally culminate in a 
piece of work that will form the summative assessment for the module, and be the yardstick  to judge pass 
or failure for that module. 
 
The general conditions for examination and assessment procedures will lie within the general regulations of 
the University. 
 
7.1.2 Module assessment  
 
Each student will be assessed on each module on the A+ to F - scale, according to the grading scheme 
approved by the Senate. 
 
The form of assessment will vary according to the nature of the module and can take into account the 
experiences of the cohort of students being assessed. All modules within the scheme that in clude an 
intensive period require the student to undertake the pre -course work. The pre -course is compulsory and 
failure to complete this shall affect the final grade of the module. Depending on the module, the pre-course 
work may be graded up to 20% of the module total.  
 
Normally the assessment for modules studied in intensive mode will be issued during the intensive study 
period. 
 
The work is normally assessed within three weeks of submission and feedback is returned to the students. A 
written piece of c oursework may be submitted as a  hard copy, where appropriate,  or by an online or electronic 
submission.  
 
7.1.3 Summary of Assessment Scheme
Document Title: post grad regulations
Students will be assessed both continuously as well as at standard block examination throughout the 
program.   
 
7.2 ONLINE, DISTANCE & E-LEARNING (ODeL) PROGRAMS 
 
This programme will be comprised of part-time students.  Students will complete the programme based on a 
cohort learning model as follows: 
 
Students may or may not  come together at a residency at least 2 ti mes per year for a total of at least two 
weeks. 
 
All courses are completed via the appropriate distance education curricular formats.  These methods will 
incorporate course workbook, readers , video materials, online learning and other additional material.  
Dialogue with faculty/ mentors will be by a variety of means (including face to face meetings, e -mail, 
telephone or video call).    
 
Faculty/ Mentors are responsible for coaching and facilitating the dialogue with their cohort group, both 
individually and collectively, during this specified course period.   
 
Students have practical projects where they have to apply what they are learning to their current leadership 
role, as well as teach it to others and complete some written assignments. 
 
7.2.1 STUDY FORMAT 
 
The study time is equivalent to a normal 15 week Semester with the study time distributed as follows:  
 
One week of face -to-face or remote teaching and interaction --- teaching and interaction with course 
facilitators (Last week of January , May and Augu st every year); 14 weeks of distance Learning which includes 
different activities like reviewing study material and  already prepared handbooks, listening to audio and 
videos, coaching and on -line discussions with facilitators and cohort members, writing a ssignments and on -line 
learning. 
Examinations are written on the first day of the next face -to-face session or remotely at the course specific 
appointed time. 
  
7.2.2 EVALUATION 
 
Evaluation is done according to best principles of adult education in 4 diffe rent ways: Course 
attendance/participation  cohort discussions, coaching with facilitators and written assignments.  The 
application of these is left to the specific programmes.   
 
Progressive assessment or a n end of course exam will be required for studen ts to demonstrate the overall 
knowledge of the subject matter and the ability to integrate the topic of the course in his/her life and 
work.
Document Title: post grad regulations
At the end of the degree program the student is required to submit a research project/dissertation. 
 
7.2.3 INSTRUCTION AND SUPERVISION 
 
Opportunities for on -going interaction with the course instructor or other appointed course staff must be 
available so that students who are dispersed across the country or region, have interaction through a variety 
of communication technology. 
 
7.3 RESEARCH-BASED PROGRAMMES 
 
Applicants for MPhil/PhD by research will in the first instance be admitted as Research Students for the first 
year.  
 
Research students will undertake guided Advanced Studies in the area of research, review key j ournal 
papers which should result in a Research Proposal. Research proposals shall be defended at an Oral 
Examination. Students who successfully defend their proposals shall apply through their Supervisors for UCU 
Doctoral or Master of Philosophy Candidature.  
 
Supervisors should seek approval of the program of Study for the first year from their Faculty and such a 
program should be equivalent to 4 to 6 Advanced Graduate Courses.  
 
Progress reports on the Research Students will be submitted every quarter. S tudents who do not receive 
favorable reports in the first two Quarters will be discontinued from the Research Studentship. Students who 
progress to oral examination and are not recommended for Candidature shall be discontinued.  
 
7.3.1 M PHIL /DOCTORAL CANDIDATURE 
 
MPhil/PhD Candidates will undertake approved research and independent study toward their thesis. Progress 
report will be submitted quarterly.  Candidates who do not make acceptable progress at the end of their 
first year of Doctoral Candidature w ill be recommended for terminal Masters Award. Students with 
exceptional thesis for MPhil may apply on the recommendation of Faculty to the University Admissions Board 
to upgrade to a PhD. 
 
Once the thesis is ready for submission, Faculty will notify SRPGS  to arrange for final Examination. Doctoral 
Candidates must have presented their work at two or more professional or scientific conferences and at 
least two scientific papers accepted or published in a referred Journal (acceptable to UCU standards). 
Evidence of Conference Papers and Journal  Research proposals must have ethical approval and align with 
the publication standards of the UCU School of Research and Postgraduate Studies and the National Council 
for Higher Education. The student must have publishe d two papers as the lead researcher and one should 
have been co-published with their supervisor as per National Council for Higher Education Guidelines.  
Papers must be included in the notification. 
 
7.3.2 PERIODS OF CANDIDATURE (OR TIME LIMIT) DEGREE OF DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
Document Title: post grad regulations
7.3.2.1 MINIMUM  
The minimum period of full -time candidature is three (3)  years from the date of first enrolment. The 
minimum period of part-time candidature is five (5) years from the date of first enrolment. 
 
7.3.2.2 MAXIMUM 
The maximum period of full-time candidature is six (6) years. The maximum period of part-time candidature 
is eight (8) years. 
 
 
MASTER’S DEGREE BY RESEARCH 
 
The minimum period of full -time candidature is two years from the date of first enrolment . The maximum 
period for full-time candidature is up to four years. The maximum period for part-time candidature is up to 
six (6) years. 
 
 
 8. EXAMINATION REGULATIONS 
 
 8.1 STUDENTS’ REGISTRATION FOR THE EXAMINATION 
 
No candidates will be admitted to any examination unless: 
 
i. They are registered students of the University with a valid Registration Card and 
Examination Card. 
 
ii. They have satisfactorily attended the course, and done the course work. Course work 
marked papers shall be submitted to the Head of the Department tw o weeks before the end 
of the semester and course work marks shall be put on the notice board a week before the 
beginning of the examinations.  
iii. They have been exempted from any such requirements by the Senate on the 
recommendation of the department/ faculty board concerned. 
 
Any candidate who has been absent from the university for a prolonged period during the semester 
for any reason whose attendance at prescribed lectures, classes, practical classes, seminars, 
tutorials or clinical instructions has been u nsatisfactory, or has failed to submit essays, exercises, 
tests or examinations set by lecturers, may be denied the Certificate of Due Performance and may 
be barred by Senate on the recommendations of the department/faculty board, from sitting any 
university examination. Certificates of attendance shall be issued by individual lecturers through 
their heads to the Deputy Vice -Chancellor (Academic Affairs), two weeks before the end of a 
semester.
Document Title: post grad regulations
8.2 CONDUCT OF EXAMINATIONS  
 
 
Examinations shall be conducted as face to face or online.  
 
7.2.1 Sitting Arrangements for Face to Face Examinations  
 
Arrangement for sitting will be made by the Deans of Faculties and invigilators. 
 
7.2.2 Instructions to Candidates 
 
It is the responsibility of all candidates to take  note of the dates and times of the examination(s) 
for which they are registered. This applies to all programmes including those conducted online. 
Candidates will be informed of the dates and times of examinations by means of the timetable and 
notices published at least two weeks in advance. 
 
Should there be a change in the timetable for an examination after it is published; the change will 
normally be brought to the attention of candidates by means of additional notices. Students will 
not be informed individually of timetable changes. 
 
For face to face examinations, candidates will be admitted to the examination room 30 minutes 
before the examination is due to begin but will be issued examination papers 10 minutes before the 
examination.  
 
 
Any form of comm unication between candidates must cease once they enter the Examination 
Room/space for online examinations. 
 
They must not begin writing before the time at which the examination is due to begin. 
 
During the thirty minutes the invigilator will: 
 
 
a) Check that each candidate has a valid Examination Card and Registration Card. 
 
b) Make an announcement to the effect that candidates should satisfy themselves that they are 
in possession of the correct paper. 
c) Call attention to any rubric at the head of the paper, which seems to require attention.  
d) Announce that both sides of the writing paper must be used. Hershel will then tell students 
when they may begin writing. Candidates are required to supply themselves with pens, pencils, 
rulers, erasers, blotting papers, the us ual geometrical instruments and calculators and data for 
online examinations.
Document Title: post grad regulations
Except for open book examinations, no piece of paper, no books, bags, or attach cases should be 
taken by candidates into the exam room, including veranda and around doorways. Candidates are 
not allowed to use their own logarithmic tables. Mobile phones and all internet enabled gargets are 
not allowed in face to face examination rooms.  
 
 
 
Invigilators shall have the power to confiscate any unauthorized book, manuscript, or other a id 
brought into the examination room, and to expel from the examination room any candidates who 
create disturbance. They shall report to the Deputy Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs any case 
of a candidate suspected of giving or obtaining unauthorized a ssistance or of attempting to do so, 
and the Deputy Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs shall have power to take any further steps he 
may consider necessary. He/she shall then report the matter to the Academic Disciplinary 
Committee. 
 
For every fifty (50) candidates, one (1) invigilator shall be provided. The Dean is assigned to make 
a list of invigilators for examinations. The modalities   for supervision of online examinations will 
be prescribed on the platforms. 
Normally no candidate may be admitted in the examination room/space after the expiry of half an 
hour from the beginning of the examination period. A candidate may nevertheless be admitted at 
any time on the following conditions:  
i. The invigilator shall make it clear to the candidate that the University reserves the right to 
refuse acceptance of his/her script. 
 
ii. the invigilator shall make a full report in writing to the 
 
Deputy 
 
Vice 
 
Chancellor 
 
for
Document Title: post grad regulations
25 
 
 
Academic Affairs stating; 
Normally no candidate may be admitted in the examination room a fter the expiry of half an hour from the 
beginning of the examination period. A candidate may nevertheless be admitted at any time on the 
following conditions:- 
 
(a) The invigilator shall make i t clear to the candidate that the University reserves the  right to refuse 
acceptance of his script. 
 
(b) The invigilator shall make a full report in writing to the Deputy Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs 
stating; 
 
 i. the time of admission 
 ii. whether any candidate had previously left the room 
 iii. any special reason given by the candidate for the 
   lateness. 
 
Candidates shall not use an additional examination booklet unless the first one is used up or have been told 
to do so. 
 
Candidates may move out of the examination room one at a time. 
 
Candidates shall write their registration numbers distinctly at the top of the cover of every answer book or 
separate answer sheet, which is handed in. 
 
Candidates shall bring their valid examination cards to each examination. 
 
Candidates shall be required to sign an attendan ce roll after handing over the examination answer script to 
the invigilator. 
 
The use of scrap paper is not permitted. All rough work must be done in the answer books and crossed out 
neatly through, or in supplementary answer sheets which must be submitted to the invigilator together with 
the main answer book(s). Except for the question paper (if it is not multiple choice) candidates may not 
remove from the examination room or mutilate any paper or other material supplied. 
Candidates who are permitted to le ave before the end of the examination period must not leave their 
scripts on their desks, but must hand them to the invigilator. 
 
At the end of the allotted time, all other candidates shall stop writing when instructed to do so by the 
invigilator and shall  gather their scripts together in order. They shall not leave their desks until the 
invigilator has collected their scripts. 
 
At the end of the Examination, Candidates shall stop writing and stand up when instructed to do so by the 
invigilator.
Document Title: post grad regulations
26 
 
Candidates are strongly cautioned that any form of indiscipline, particularly during the examination, may 
lead to expulsion. 
 
 
 8.3 AEGROTAT  
 
Any student who misses an examination due to illness, bereavement or other extraordinary circumstances 
may apply in writing  to Senate for an aegrotat examination. In all cases, the illness or bereavement must 
occur during, or immediately before the examination. The student must submit the application to the 
faculty dean within two weeks of the end of the examination period. Th e application must include the 
following: 
 
i. In the case of illness, a letter or certificate from the  University clinic or counselor indicating the nature 
of the condition and the reasons it prevented writing the examination. A student who is not present on 
campus  during his or her illness  shall submit a letter from a qualified medical practitioner to the 
University clinic, who will verify the letter and prepare a cover letter. The student  shall then submit bot h 
letters to Senate with the  application for aegrotat. 
 
ii. In the case of bereavement,  a death certificate or death notice, along with evidence of the stu dent’s 
relationship to  the deceased. Under ordinary circumstances, loss of a spouse, child, father, mother or 
nuclear sibling (sharing both parents) shall qualify for an aegrotat. 
 
iii. In other circumstances, any police records or other official description of the events that prevented the 
student from writing the examination will be considered. Senate shall consider whether the student missed 
the  examination due to circumstances beyond his or her  control or whether the missed examination was 
due to negligence on the student’s part. 
 
iv. Senate shall consider ae grotat requests at the first meeting of the subsequent semester. The secretary 
shall inform the student and the faculty in writing of its decision. The Deputy Vice -chancellor Academic 
Affairs shall maintain all coursework marks and attendance records and 
 will reflect the student’s status as “incomplete” for any pending aegrotats. 
 
v. Non-finalists who qua lify for one or more aegrotats w ill write the examinations. The Deputy Vice -
chancellor Academic Affairs’ office and concerned faculty deans will  draw up an aegrotat schedule to allow 
all qualified students to complete their examinations as soon as  possible, without clashing with the 
teaching timetable. The  schedule should make the most efficient use of invigilators,  times and 
facilities. Aegrotat examinations require the  same degree of security as any other examinations. The  
 department concerned will prepare a special examination.  
Students who miss an aegrotat examination for any reason  shall wait for the next regular examination in 
that course.  
 
vi. In the case of finalists who qualify for an aegrotat, the  Faculty Dean will recommend a  mode of 
assessment to Senate. This may include: i) oral or written special  examination to be scheduled at the
Document Title: post grad regulations
27 
 
earliest opportunity,  ii) additional project or coursework, or iii) an assessment   of work already 
completed. If Senate determines that the wor k is not equal to th e regular requirements for the course 
(especially in the case of iii), it shall award an  unclassified mark of Pass Aegrotat, which shall not count 
towards the student’s grade point average.  
 
 8.4 RE-MARKING OF EXAMINATIONS 
 
A student w ho is dissatisfied with a grade obtained in a particular examination may apply to the Deputy 
Vice-Chancellor Academic Affairs for the remarking of the examination paper in which the course was 
offered. The application should be made not later than two week s after the release of the examination 
grades by the Office of the Deputy Vice-Chancellor for Academic Affairs. This application should give a valid 
justification for the request. The Deputy Vice -Chancellor for Academic Affairs will ask the Faculty Dean to  
review the case to see if remarking is warranted. If the request is approved, an examiner other than the one 
who initially marked the script, appointed by the Faculty Dean, will remark the paper. 
  
The grade awarded after the remarking of the paper, will be final regardless of whether it is lower or the 
same as the first grade, and will be immediately forwarded to the Deputy Vice-Chancellor Academic Affairs.  
 
The Deputy Vice Chancellor Academic Affairs will then communicate the grade to the student. The s tudent 
shall not request for a second remarking of the same script. 
 
 9. RESEARCH COMPONENT 
 
Every candidate shall be assigned a supervisor. 
 
 9.1  PROGRESS REPORTS 
 
9.1.1 TRADITIONAL AND ONLINE, DISTANCE AND E-LEARNING (ODEL) PROGRAMMES 
 
Every candidate i s required to submit (through a supervisor) reports on their progress every 
semester/module. This is done on a special progress report form which the department will supply. Failure 
to fulfill this requirement may lead to discontinuation. 
 
9.1.2 PROGRESS REPORT FOR RESEARCH-BASED PROGRAMMES 
 
Research higher degree candidates are required to submit a detailed Annual Progress Report each year 
which outlines the progress of their work to date and the work that is planned for the next year. Progress 
reports are a major method of monitoring each candidate’s progress. They provide an opportunity for the 
candidate, supervisor(s) and school to review and evaluate progress on the project. They also provide the 
Dean of the Faculty and the Graduate Research School with indications of difficulties in candidature.
Document Title: post grad regulations
28 
 
A Progress Report reminder is sent to each candidate’s term or contact address about six weeks before the 
due date, which is on or about the anniversary of the candidate’s commencement in the degree. The 
Progress Report form is available at http://www.postgraduate.ucu.ac.ug/forms/ or from the SRPGS. 
 
The form must be fully completed and returned to the Graduate Research School by the due date. A 
satisfactory report leading to a determination of satisfactory prog ress is a condition of automatic re -
enrolment by the Graduate Research School unless there are any outstanding debts to the University for 
charges or fines. Accordingly, candidates who do not submit a satisfactory report by the due date, or who 
have outsta nding debts to the University will not have their re -enrolment for the next academic year 
approved, and continuation of their candidature will be reviewed. 
 
 9.2 EXTENSION OF REGISTRATION  
 
If a candidate realizes that he/she cannot complete his/her work w ithin the time allowed, it is his/her duty 
to take the initiative to apply for extension of the registration. If the registration of lapses, the candidate 
will be de-registered 
 
 9.3 DISSERTATION OR THESIS 
 
Dissertations/Theses are written according to the University approved format. 
 
Submission of Dissertation/Thesis for Examination: 
 
i. A candidate is not allowed to formally start on research work unless he/she has passed the taught 
courses. 
 
ii. A candidate will be required to submit a research proposal to the Research & Ethics Committee and the 
Faculty Board and begin the research component at the time stated by the faculty. 
 
iii. Masters and PhD candidates must be ready to submit their dissertation by the end of their fourth and 
sixth semesters respectively. 
iv. A candidate intending to submit his/her thesis/dissertation (or practical work), must give three months’ 
written notice of submission for a masters degree or six months’ written notice for a Doctoral degree to the 
Dean, SRPGS and must be endorsed by the Supervisor. 
 
v. When the candidates’ the sis/dissertation is ready for submission, he/she should electronic copies with 
the authority of the supervisor direct to the Dean, SRPGS.  
 
 9.4 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR RESEARCH-BASED DEGREES 
 
Candidates for PhD are required to submit a Research Proposal after six months (for full -time candidates) or 
nine months (for part-time candidates). Candidates for master’s degrees by research are required to submit 
a Research Proposal after four months (for full-time candidates) or eight months (for part- time
Document Title: post grad regulations
29 
 
candidates). Continuation of candidature is subject to approval of the proposal by the Board of the SRPGS  
and the Research and Ethics Committee. 
 
9.4.1 Change of Research Direction 
 
In some cases a candidate may c hange research direction after commencement or part -way through a 
candidature. A change in research direction will not usually result in an extension of the maximum period of 
candidature. Candidates significantly changing research direction are required to  provide a new Research 
Proposal highlighting the changes. Any intention to change research direction must first be discussed with 
the supervisor(s) and the Dean of Faculty. A request to change research direction must be submitted, with 
the support of the supervisor(s) and the Faculty, to the Board  and the Research Ethics Committee  for 
approval using the Joint Enrolment, Change of School or Change of Research Direction form. 
 
9.4.2 Supervision 
 
Every Doctoral candidate who undertakes research is assigned a supervisor and a co -supervisor. Masters 
candidates shall be assigned a supervisor. 
 
Where there is co-supervision, at least one of the supervisors should be a full time member of staff at UCU. 
Guidelines for supervision of Research Students will be provided by the School of Research and Postgraduate 
Studies and can be obtained from the university website at www.ucu.ac.ug . 
 
 10. EXAMINATION OF POST GRADUATE STUDENTS’ DISSERTATIONS/THESES 
 
When a candidate gives notice of  submission, the examiners and viva voce panel are recommended by the 
respective Faculty Board for appointment by the Board of Postgraduate Studies and Research. It is the 
responsibility of the Board of Post Graduate Studies to appoint examiners and to ens ure safe dispatch of 
copies of the thesis or dissertation to them. 
 
Requirements for external examiners include:  
  
i. Recognized expertise in the area being examined 
 
ii. Experience supervising postgraduate students and examination of such students 
 
iii. Formal academic and/or professional qualification in the area and at the level being examined.  
 
iv. Not be presently employed in the University. 
 
Two External Examiners are required where the candidate is a member of staff of the University. Two 
examiners are appointed in this case to add an additional layer of independent assurance to the process.  
 
 10.1 VIVA VOCE EXAMINATION
Document Title: post grad regulations
30 
 
 
All candidates registered for masters  and Doctoral degrees must be subjected to Viva Voce examination in 
order to assess the cand idate’s in-depth knowledge of his/her registered work.  These examinations can be 
done face to face or remotely.  
The following procedure is followed:- 
 
i. Notice for viva voce examination is given by the Dean/ Director to the candidate to prepare for 
that examination and for members of the panel to read the thesis/dissertation. 
 
ii. The viva voce panel consists of six members with a chair person who should normally be the 
Dean/Director. The role of the chairman is to guide the examination. 
 
iii. Four members including the chairperson should form a quorum. The candidates are accorded adequate 
time to make presentations followed by discussions. 
 
iv. The viva voce examination is a closed examination conducted by the appointed panel only. 
 
v. Audio visual facilities are availed to the candidates by departments (where necessary). 
 
vi. The assessment follows laid down criteria where panelists  evaluate the presentation, the thesis/ 
dissertation and the response to their question and give a percentage mark. 
 
vii. Candidates are finally assessed on a 10 (ten) point system  and a pass is equal to 6 points (60%) for 
masters and 7 points (70%) for Doctoral programs. 
 
viii.If a candidate is assessed and found to be on borderline,  the panel takes a decision and makes an 
appropriate recommendation. 
 
ix. In case of revision \corrections being required, one of the internal examiners should be satisfied to the 
completeness of the exercise. 
 
x. In case of failure the candidate may be advised to redo the work or to discontinue from t he degree 
programme. 
 
xi. The report of the viva voce examination includes the membership and recommendation of the panel and 
is  signed by all panelists that attended the session. 
 
 11. AWARD OF DEGREES 
A letter of award of the degree is processed by the School for Research and Post Graduate Studies only when 
a candidate has made corrections on the thesis/dissertation as recommended by the viva -voce panel and a 
letter from the examiner who was entrusted by the viva voce panel to oversee the corrections. Th e 
examiner writes to the Dean SRPGS indicating that he/she is satisfied with the corrections, through the
Document Title: post grad regulations
31 
 
Dean/Director. Viva voce examination report be made available to the School of Postgraduate Studies 
before the award letter is prepared. 
 
Note: For Doctoral candidates, only those candidates who have received their award letters are eligible for 
inclusion in the book of graduands and to attend the graduation ceremony. 
 
12. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 
 
(Specified in individual program regulations)